four three two one
yeah and we're live all right so to set
this up when Gary was on last Gary
Taubes Stephan how do I say your last
name Stephan DNA DNA yeah DNA
it's like DNA like DNA but with a G
right got it okay when you were on last
Stephan had some opposition to some of
the things that you were saying we
talked about getting him on and you on
together we finally pulled it off took
there was a lot of wrangling there's a
lot of back-and-forth and cat wrangling
but we got it we're here give me your
position on this is all folks listening
this is all about obesity and the the
mechanism for obesity is that fair to
say
yeah yeah so essentially the main points
that we want to talk about today I'll
try to keep this up fist from your face
okay sure just that you move around
um what causes obesity and what causes
insulin resistance which is behind a lot
of our chronic diseases that are common
in society and please give us your
background yeah so I have a BS and
biochemistry PhD in neuroscience after
getting my PhD in neuroscience I went on
to study the neuroscience of obesity at
the University of Washington and
particularly the brain circuits that
regulate body fatness hopefully we'll
get a chance to talk about those today
and then I went on to become a science
consultant science communicator and
write a book called the hungry brain
that is my attempt to explain for a non
specialist audience what what causes
obesity and yeah so that's my background
now what is your disagreement with
Gary's position yeah so how about how
about I just can I start to explain
please do what I believe causes obesity
I'm gonna be long-winded here is that
it's okay go right ahead all right we
have ours okay cool so first a little
bit of housekeeping I'm going to be
citing a lot
evidence today and so I was one of these
bring this up to your focus sure just
moving around sure you want to sit back
how's that day perfect okay I'm gonna be
exciting a lot of evidence today and I
want people to be able to follow along
at home and so I put many of the
references that I'm gonna be citing on
that so it doesn't cover your face okay
there we go all right I put a lot of the
references that I'm gonna be citing on
my website Stephon Guillen a.com or if
you don't feel like spelling my name you
can go to whole health sore so our G and
I have a numbered list of topics there
and I'm going to be calling out numbers
just scroll down to the number that I
referred to and the references are all
there the second thing I want to say
that I want to be really clear about
today is that I'm not here to be the
anti low carb guy okay um I think low
carb diets are a valid tool for
controlling body fatness and controlling
blood sugar I'm not here to talk anybody
out of being on a low carb diet what I
am here to try to talk people out of is
some of the mythology that has
accumulated around the low carb diet
okay so I want to get started with an
analogy to help people understand why
the brain is important in obesity so
imagine you're an alien coming down from
outer space and you want to understand
what's going on on earth and you notice
that on the highway some cars are
traveling faster than others some cars
go faster some cars go slower and you
want to figure out why and so you go and
you start studying the tires of the cars
because obviously the amount of force
that is exerted by the tire onto the
asphalt is the thing that determines the
speed of the car we know this this is
just physics and so you study the tires
and you study the tires and you study
them and you never figure out why some
cars go faster than others now why is
that the reason is that you're studying
the wrong part of the system if you want
to understand the why some cars go
faster than others you have to
understand the part of the system that
regulates speed and that is the person
behind the wheel and so in this analogy
the tires are fat cells and the person
behind the wheel is the brain there has
been
tons of research on fat cell biology on
what factors put fat in fat cells what
take it out been tons and tons of
research on that and it's intuitively
obvious that we should be studying that
to understand obesity right but in fact
all of that research has yielded very
little insight into why some people are
fatter than others that's because it's
the wrong part of the system study fat
cells do not regulate the size of fat
cells any more than the tires on a car
regulate the speed of the car the thing
that regulates the size of fat cells is
the brain so let's talk about first I'll
give you a little framework for thinking
about this the brain evolved over about
600 million years to promote the
survival and reproduction of our
ancestors and over the course of that
time we evolved all these different
brain circuits that have specialized
functions they generate our hunger and
our cravings and our fullness feelings
that generate our eating behavior what
and how much we eat and they actively
regulate the amount of fat on our bodies
and that's one of the things I want to
talk about and all of these circuits
evolved and these are non conscious by
the way so you don't decide you want to
be hungry you don't decide that you want
to have a craving these are things that
bubble up from non conscious parts of
your brain that you don't control so
these circuits are calibrated to an
environment of our ancestors not the
environment we're living in right now so
these circuits all evolved to function
optimally in the environment of our
ancestors promote the survival and
reproduction of our ancestors so what
happens when you put these brain
circuits in the modern environment where
you have abundant calorie dense tasty
foods rich in carbohydrate and fat is
these same brain circuits push us to
over-consume and they push our bodies to
accumulate and hold on to fat and then
what you see as a result is the three
hallmarks of obesity first of all the
obvious you see elevated body fat mass
second of all you see elevated calorie
intake people with obesity consume more
calories and people who do not have
obesity after correcting for
and sex and physical activity level and
third you see that people with obesity
defend their higher level of body
fatness against changes and so there's
actually a regulatory change that
happens it's not conscious defense you
know they're not trying to remain obese
it's these body fat regulatory circuits
and this is where Gary gets it right is
that people with obesity are not just
lean people who eat more calories
there's actually a change in the
regulatory activity that regulates body
fat in the body and we can get back to
how that happens but I'll just leave it
there for now so up until this point
I've basically just been telling a
plausible story right I mean I haven't
actually sighted any evidence yet to
support that my story is correct and so
let's get into that let's talk about
what some of the evidence is that
supports this idea that I've just laid
out so I want to start with the genetics
of obesity I think this offers some
weight for one second
as long as it's very breech the question
I don't I still don't quite understand
what the model is okay if you don't
understand the model how about I lay out
how about I finished laying it out and
then you can ask a question because I
may answer your question over the course
of continuing so let me just finish okay
so now the genetics of obesity offers us
a lot of insight into the biological
mechanisms that drive differences in
body fatness in the general population
so you get these studies like the the
most interesting studies are the
genome-wide Association studies they get
hundreds of thousands of people together
and they sequence are they they measure
all these markers and their genomes and
they figure out what parts of the genome
makes some people fatter than others so
if you have version a in this particular
location you end up a little fatter than
if you have version B and when you look
at all the places where this is
happening you can see the genes where
it's happening in and that tells you if
you look at what those genes are doing
that tells you what the mechanisms are
that underlie everyday differences in
body fatness in
general population and so to kind of
warm ourselves up let's start top by
talking about height genes so height has
a strong genetic component so does body
fatness and researchers has figured out
a lot of the genes that underlie
differences in height between people and
when you look at what those genes do
they tend to be involved in the growth
and development of the skeleton and the
connective tissue which is what you
would expect right because growth of the
skeleton determines your height so genes
that determine diabetes risk type 2
diabetes are all about insulin
sensitivity all about insulin secretion
and the function of the
insulin-secreting pancreas which is what
you expect because diabetes is a disease
that is all about insulin so these
studies are really good at getting at
the underlying biological mechanisms
that are driving these phenomena so what
do these studies have to say about
obesity if Gary's model is correct we
should see a bunch of genes popping up
related to fat cells and insulin if my
model is correct we should see a bunch
of genes popping up related to the brain
and in fact that's exactly what we see
the genetics of obesity are
overwhelmingly related to differences in
brain activity between individuals and
okay so that's one piece of evidence
another piece of evidence there are five
fda-approved weight-loss drugs four of
those acting the brain one of them
reduces dietary fat absorption in the
digestive tract there are no effective
fat loss drugs that I'm aware of the
target insulin or fat cells third piece
of evidence if you look at some people
get really unlucky in life and they end
up with these horrible genetic mutations
that you know knock out some biological
pathways some of these people end up
with extreme obesity people and also
animals we see this in mice and rats
just occasionally you get unlucky and
you get really really fat and
researchers have been cataloguing what
are these mutations when we find people
who are genetically really obese
what are these mutations that are making
them fat what is the biological
mechanism that's getting
screwed up that's making them fat and
what they've found is that all of these
mutations that they've identified to
date a number of them are occurring in
the leptin signaling pathway and this is
the leptin is the primary fat regulating
hormone in the body
Gary avoids this never talks about this
in his writing but leptin is the primary
fat regulating hormone in the body and
these mutations either knock out leptin
they knock out leptin receptors or they
knock out the left and response pathway
in the brain and so that's the third
piece of evidence ok so now we haven't
really gotten around to talking about
what it is exactly about the bad
interaction that happens between our
ancient brains and the modern food
environment that causes us to become fat
we've established that the brain is
central to obesity but we haven't really
established what it is exactly about
that interaction why does our modern
food why does our modern environment
promote obesity right so basically there
are three different ways that I'm gonna
look at this from but first I want to
say that the probably the best way to
answer this question is to start with
the question what is the most fattening
diet in the world what is the diet that
is more fattening than any others and
the answer to that is it's human junk
food in a variety of non-human species
and humans it's human junk food that is
more fattening than any others and I'm
gonna skip over some of the research
here that demonstrates this by the way I
haven't been calling out numbers here
okay let me call out some numbers
reference number two on my website is
those genetic studies reference number
one is the obesity drugs reference
number six is those spontaneously
occurring genetic mutations and now I'm
talking about reference number 52 so I'm
gonna I'm gonna gloss over some of the
individual research because I'm being
long-winded here but essentially
you find is that this stuff is really
fattening in animals many different
species that's super fattening in humans
calorie dense when you put create an
environment with abundant easy calorie
dense tasty foods rich in carbs and fat
you see this dramatic over consumption
and fat gain across many species
including humans and what you find in
the research is that the sugar and the
carbohydrate cannot explain that they're
part of the effect yes to explain part
of it but you cannot replicate that
effect by only feeding sugar and
carbohydrate you can't replicate it in
animals you can't replicate it in humans
when you say you can't replicate it you
mean you can't replicate obesity what do
you mean yeah that's right you cannot
you cannot cause the same degree of fat
gain the same extent of fat gain the
same extent of overconsumption using
only sugar and carbohydrate that you can
cause with a variety of calorie dense
palatable human foods you can't fully
replicate it with sugar and carbs you
cannot fully replicate it with fat alone
either if you put those when we can we
can get deeper in this if you want but
I'm confused so you're saying that the
the diet that causes the most obesity is
what we think right this human junk food
diet rich in sugar simple carbs bullshit
bullshit diet right what do you you're
saying that you can't replicate that
with just you cannot are fully
replicated boolean so what I mean is
that if you just feed if you just
increase sugar intake right in animals
or in humans you do get weight gain but
it is modest compared to what you get
when you put people around a variety of
calorie dense palatable foods rich in
carbohydrate in fat similarly if you
that's very confusing how's that because
I'm not sure exactly what you're saying
you're saying you if you give people
this calorie rich sugar diet of junk
food you will make them gain weight but
not as much way
as what so what I'm saying is that if
you if you give people or animals the
the actual human junk food with all the
carbs and fat and everything they gain a
lot more weight and a lot faster than if
you just give them a diet that's high in
sugar and high in refined carbohydrate
and what that shows is that the sugar
and they're fine carbohydrate cannot
fully explain the effect can't actually
explain why those foods are fattening
see this one no I don't do it okay
because you're saying if you give people
the diet of American junk food you you'd
get not as much of an effect if you give
them just the sugar in the carbohydrate
right we're saying yeah so but what are
you giving them when you're giving them
the diet of junk food you can well for
example in animals no it's different
because if you think about human junk
foods generally those foods contain fat
and carbohydrate and salt and all kinds
of other things so it's more it's more
than just it's a lot Soekarno yes so
just and okay sugar
so I'll get in more detail so the ways
that you can do this you can add sugar
just sugar table sugar to the feed of
animals that's one way to do it or you
can add it to their drinking water
sometimes it's a little bit fattening
sometimes it's not it's not that
fattening and animals in humans you can
ask them to drink sugar sweetened
beverages that are just sugar and you
can see what happens and people will
gain weight or you can tell them to stop
drinking sugar sweetened beverages and
you can see what happens okay
people will gain weight they will lose
weight suggesting that that is part of
the explanation but it's a much smaller
effect than you see with this full
pallet of these foods that contain carbs
and fat and all this other stuff as I'm
saying car well obviously there's more
calories right if there's carbs and fat
and all these other correct if you think
that calories matter then we agree oh
well the short matters right Gary
doesn't think it matters you don't think
it matters well I think it's the wrong
way to think about it what do you
disagree if anything with what he said
so far well so far what he said hasn't
been particularly
revelatory um the I think we have to
step back for a second because you know
while the low-carb community might have
a better understanding of where we
disagree I think the greater community
and that Jo reaches might not so
fundamentally with Stefan saying and
with the research community saying and
the conventional thinking in this field
is that the brain and correct me any
point they get this wrong but the brain
regulates does the fundamental job of
controlling how fat we are yes and the
way it does it is by controlling or Mis
controlling our intake and our
expenditure and the difference ends up
in fat tissue is that fair to say for
the most primarily intake but yeah yeah
so Stefan has a brain centric view of
the universe and the community at large
does as well so if we go outside and we
walk down you know Ventura Boulevard and
we see some of the weighs 400 pounds
they've clearly taken in more calories
and they should have over the course of
their life and it's been stored in their
fat tissue and Stefan says I think would
say that the problem is in their brains
ability to regulate intake to
expenditure is that correct
yeah okay and let me I have to fix my
headphones so how are we gonna do this
I'm getting feedback when I talk you're
getting feedback yeah it's just weird
could be the hold on months up yeah for
those who don't know I'm hearing
impaired as they say kindly Mike kids
would say deaf as a post
no matter so I took off my hearing aids
that's a little better okay so what I've
been arguing so I come along my
background I'm a journalist I'm an
investigative journalist with a science
background okay that's what I do and I'm
curious and I've gotten a lot of you
know and I my first two books were
studying what's called pathological
science which is about people got the
wrong results in science because a lot
I'm scientists do so by I'm very
sensitive to this and as I was doing the
research for my first book which took
five years what I noticed in when you
take a historical perspective is that
the research community studying obesity
was very focused on the brain they just
assumed that fat people are gluttons and
I'm going to use some socially
unacceptable language because in part
that's how they thought about it in fact
when you read the obesity literature
from the 40s and 50s it's shocking the
way these people talked about people
with obesity and the assumption was that
they're gluttons or they're neurotic or
they're anxious or they're just you know
they're but it was all brain center
mm-hmm and when they got to the nineteen
sixties the field was being run by
psychologists and psychiatrists who were
trying to get people with obesity to eat
less and my favorite example is one team
that was trying to get they got the
wives to stop having sex with the
husband's if they didn't lose weight
every week and then would motivate them
I think even you point out that sex is a
greater motivator in your book than
tasty foods it didn't say it was greater
but I said it was on par bar so and I'm
gonna just read you uh I won't worry do
that the so there was this while the
obesity research community is focusing
on the brain
there were people studying fat
metabolism
endocrinologists a study hormones and
hormones related disorders saying that
the old you know fat storage and fat
mobilization the burning of fat in the
human body is controlled by this very
diverse set of hormones and enzymes and
the nervous system is involved in well
and our body does a very careful job of
decide basically orchestrating how we
use feels after we eat and the
implication was and I think Stephan kind
of stepped into this with the very first
thing you said so the assumption was
obesity is a disorder of excess fat
accumulation so today when you read the
literature the articles often say
obesity is a sort of energy imbalance
you take in more calories
spend there were still the best
scientists in the field the best
physician scientists with a look obesity
the sort of excess fat accumulation
let's look at what regulates fat
accumulation the human body
some people are programmed or
dysregulated to store more fat and if
they store more fat they're going to
their behavior is going to respond
they'll be hungry or they'll eat more
they'll be gluttons all these things so
it was a switching the the causality
instead of the brain determining energy
balance and that determining fat
accumulation the idea was sort of let's
see what regulates fat accumulation if
that's dysregulated if I have a if I
give birth to a daughter who weighs a
hundred pounds at age four I'm not going
to worry about how much he eats and
exercises I'm gonna worry about what's
going on with fat accumulation in this
young girl that her body is just as if
you give a you know if you have a child
who's six foot eight when he's six years
old you're not gonna worry about how
much he eats and exercises you're gonna
worry that he's over secreting growth
hormone
so the idea basically what I've done my
role in this is to say look in this
vitally important pair in the 1960's and
1970's when obesity researchers came to
understand fat metabolism researchers
came to understand the regulation of fat
cells the obesity people were convinced
that the problem is in the brain and
those obesity people eventually grew
into the world that Stefan got his PhD
in this neurobiological world where you
study what's happening in the brain and
you ignore what's happening in the fat
cells and fat mobilization and fatty
acid oxidation and then sort and when
you look at that you find a whole world
of places in which people can pre be
predetermined you know be driven to be
fat mmm-hmm so for example when I was in
high school senior in high school I even
weighed 195 pounds and I played football
and my brother two years older weight
195 pounds his senior year and played
football my brother never got
more than a hundred 95 pounds and I went
up to 240 we both ate as much as humanly
possible you know as you could imagine
that's what high school athletes do my
brother was always lean I was always
chubby my brother stayed lean and became
an endurance athlete I became a football
player and I lifted weights I put on
muscle easily and I fat and easily he
didn't the conventional wisdom would be
the reason I went to 240 and he never
got to 195 was that my brain was
different than his my argument is our
bodies were fundamentally different so
if I see somebody walking down the
street always 300 pounds I don't worry
about I don't think about what the
problem is with her brain regulating
intake and expenditure I think about
what's why is her body driving her to be
300 pounds so that I think kind of the
fundamental difference and is it is it
the brain that can't do the job or is it
the body that can't do the job and the
brain is responding to what's happening
in the body yeah is this a reductionist
perspective because I mean isn't it a
whole list I mean holistically you're
looking at the entire Machine of the
human body the idea that the brain is
somehow another separate from the body
is saying it's separate the question is
is a brain driving what's happening in
the body or is it responding to it yeah
so and you know the brain of course does
respond a lot to what's happening in the
body and we can talk about that and how
that works but you know I think it's we
can tell stories but the things the
thing that differentiates a story that's
true from a story that is not true is
evidence and so you know you talk about
the difference between your brother and
you this is where that genetics evidence
comes back in that I was talking about
your brother and you only share half of
your genes we know that genetics has a
strong impact on who has a greater
susceptibility to body fatness than not
than others and we also know what the
genes do that underlie those differences
and they are primary I'm not done Gary
let me finish
I just want those genes something no no
not right now I'm in the middle of
saying something those
jeans are primarily related to
differences in brain function that is
what the genetics say and so that
suggests that the reason why you had a
greater propensity than your brother to
become fat probably has to do with
differences in genetics that relate to
brain function that is what the research
says when you talking about to 17 year
olds that way exactly the same amount
like how do we know how much they
consumed in calories I mean we don't
have any studies we don't know any I
mean I could guarantee you we both hate
as much as humanly possible
naturally my mother who never got over
195 and I apologize for bringing you up
on the air I know you don't like that
used to say that he never gets stuffed
he just gets bored of eating after a
couple of hours okay okay but I maybe
even though like maybe if you looked at
it scientifically you ate more than him
or maybe you ate more Shawn oh I made
more carbs well so that's a difference
so the those are the two hypothesis one
hypothesis is my body and this is what
Stefan is Cypress I want to just the
thing I wanted to read how much I'll ask
you the question how much of the the
variation in human obesity - those genes
explain so if you look at the genetics
of I didn't ask how much when you said
that's talking yeah you gotta look at
please Gary um so if you look at the
genetics of obesity what you find is
that from twin studies and family
studies that measure the overall
contribution of genetics about 75% of
the differences in body fatness between
individuals is due to genetic
differences between those individuals so
you know 1995 America if you just take a
cross-section of people and you measure
how much is genes how much is
environment about 75% is genetic now we
have only identified a small proportion
of the specific genes that underlie the
propensity to obesity and so if you look
at the percentage that we have
specifically identified it's very small
and that's what I refer to in my book
how much it's like right now I think
it's up to about 10%
it was 3% when your book was populated
7% absolutely yeah the latest yeah
actually let me cite the so well daddy
there now just a second I'm gonna cite
the study just a second monocyte the
study this study is under reference
number two so you can you can go check
that out it's about 10% and these
genetic studies are advancing very
quickly and that's why in the three
years since I wrote that we have
explained a lot more than we did at the
time that I wrote that and so we have a
portion of these genes identified and
what we're seeing is that most of that
portion that we have identified relates
to brain activity and so that tells us
that primarily the differences between
individuals that determine differences
in body fatness is about differences in
brain activity no one should be shocked
about this the brain generates all of
our eating behavior it generates all of
our physical activity behavior and it
actually regulates body fatness no one
should be surprised by this I am and I
was and how he expressed well again did
you disagree with and well virtually
everything but um let's begin with track
back now the um okay so drugs that
explain obesity 10% with the argument
that I was making and the argument I
continue to make imagine if you know
take Stefan's car and see Stefan he says
Stefan say Stefan right it's okay I'm
not saying it but I mean in polish just
people don't get confused the if you
take Stefan's car analogy and somewhere
in the 1970s I I've used the car analogy
for this too but they I don't think it's
as appropriable more way to think that
somewhere in the 1970s the aliens didn't
notice that there were humans driving
the car so now they're trying to solve
the problem without the humans involved
why see some cars drive faster than
others and they come up with all kinds
of hypotheses and some of them can
explain it even when they interpret the
hypotheses one of the common problems
that science is called intellectual
phase-locked so what I've been arguing
is in effect the
obesity research community left out of
its research 1960s era and the
chronology the hormonal metabolic
regulation of fatty acid metabolism
oxidation burning and it sucks when they
did it pretty much everything they've
done since has been interpreted
incorrectly just like the aliens would
interpret the car problem if they never
know this see humans so and leptin is a
good example
so leptin is discovered in 1993 and when
leptin is discovered obesity becomes
sort of a legitimate field of science
until then it's a bunch of actually
mostly psychologists studying and and
now it becomes a sub-discipline of
molecular biology and all the molecular
biologists jump into the field and they
assume that what leptin does is control
the brain and it signals how much fat is
available it does some kind of satiety
or fuel deficiency hormone and as such
they study the brain and they study the
action of leptin in the brain now in
2002 Jeff Friedman who gets credit for
discovering love then perhaps
incorrectly publishes the paper in the
journal science it saying perhaps as
much as two-thirds or more of what
leptin does is done in the periphery in
the body and what leptin does is the
hormone that sort of is is secreted in
response to how much fat you've
accumulated and then does it stimulate
the brain to tell you to eat more or
less depending on how much fat or it
also works in liver cells which were the
cells that we're studying and the
assumption is it probably doesn't all
cells to tell your cells to burn fat so
it makes perfect sense if there's fat
available in the fat cells now you've
got a signal telling sort of influencing
the other cells of the body to burn fat
so now you've got a hormone that could
work in the periphery and the you know
below their neck or it could work above
the neck but you've got a community
that's almost exclusively studying in
the head they don't know there are human
drivers down here so that's what they do
so even in this world that I I don't I
think I know the genome paper
Stephane is probably referenced on a
number of them but yeah Maru is it I I
don't remember these so they had two
papers because what you cited in the
article you co-authored with reliable so
I have two papers one is genes
associated with obesity and one is genes
associated with body type so with body
type they're all below the neck they're
all you know fat metabolism basically
and musk you know the genes and aspects
of your body that you would expect to be
controlled like when you build up muscle
and you have to take in excess energy to
do it it makes you hungry I don't think
your brain is regulating how much muscle
you're building other than your drive to
go to the gym basically your body is
responding to the stress on the muscle
all the things you do in the
weightlifting it's all below the neck so
the argument here is again simple when
these people looked at body type
it was insulin regulated genes for the
most part growth hormone all these
things when they looked at excess body
fat they decided they were in the head
but the question is when they looked
they're programmed to think that excess
body fat is caused by overeating so they
look in the brain did they do the same
kind and I was going to call the
researcher involved I never got around
to doing it saying if body type body
shape is determined by these genes and
doesn't it make sense that X has
variations of body shape we're going to
be determined by the same genes and did
you do the same kind of searches I don't
actually know how they determine where
the genes work it's the same kind of
searches they just came up with
different sets of genes so they didn't
start with any assumptions they were
just finding though the questionnaire
where the genes work so there's a common
phenomenon all this like with leptin a
gene that everybody thinks about working
the hypothesis seems to work and every
night can I respond to that okay I can
cuz you say this in your head you say
this in your go-ahead I'm prepared to
respond whenever you're done okay in
your book you say that genes work yeah
the body is very basically it puts
different mechanisms to work as many
places they can and they're these
homeostatic feedback loops you know
something happens your whole body has to
respond so a gene that might work
primarily on one cell is scattered all
over the body because every cell and
it'll do different jobs on different
cells but if you think that the problems
in the brain that's where you look so
you get this kind of intellectual
phase-lock where that's what we do
that's what we study and neurobiologist
studies the brain daniel kahneman i
Stefan likes the site Daniel Kahneman as
well had this concept what you see is
all he's a Nobel laureate cognitive
psychologists what you see is all there
is okay and basically if you're studying
the brain that's what you look at if
you're studying the guttin until we all
get trapped into that on some extent and
what I'm saying is even in these studies
so Stefan and Stefan wrote a book about
the hungry brain that is supposed to be
about obesity but in fact you never
mention anything about the metabolic
regulation of fat accumulation it's just
not there and I would argue it has to be
there even if it's wrong if it's not
there the absence of it like you can't
talk about leptin without talking about
what it might be doing in the body you
can talk you know so there's a and it's
put me in a very odd position so Stefan
is kind of the defender of the Orthodox
and I'm the one who comes along and says
look you guys just you missed it you
screwed up you had psychologists and
psychiatrists running the field when the
endocrinologist sobbed and then you
discovered leptin and it became a
molecular biology problem and you're now
divorced from the very simplest
observations about obesity you know so
we can do huge genome-wide Association
studies they sound remarkable but if I
were to ask a simple question like why
is it I get fat here yeah the
love-handle thing it's in the back with
me I know it's not in the front but it's
here and not here I don't see what the
brain has to
yeah okay so as you mentioned there have
been different genetic studies that have
looked at body fat distribution versus
total body fatness
so total body fatness is what we're
talking about when we're talking about
obesity body fat distribution is what
we're talking about when we're talking
about the fat being on your hips versus
on your wrists now what we see is
different sets of genes that come up so
body fat distribution we actually see
insulin related genes so people that
have a central body fat distribution so
body fat around their waist tend to have
these insulin related genes that are
driving that but when you look at total
body fatness the thing that causes
obesity what you see is that those genes
are dominated by the brain and the
really cool thing out the point I want
to make about the genetics research
temperature is that it seems might be
dominated by the brain if say look come
on Gary it is unbiased that's the really
cool thing about it is that they're just
this is whatever genes are popping up
these studies do not care about what you
believe about what causes obesity this
is just whatever genes are popping up so
it's unbiased and that's what they're
saying and I'm not done here Gary now I
want to talk about you mentioned Gary
that maybe leptin is having important
actions not just in the brain but in the
body first of all I'm glad I'm flattered
that you read my book and I'm glad that
you acknowledge the existence of leptin
now this is good but now you say that
researchers focus on leptin actions in
the brain because we're phase-locked and
we can't get out of our you know we're
blinders of thinking about in terms of
the brain and that that's why we focus
on left in action in the brain the real
reason we focus on left in action in the
brain is because it has been
demonstrated that its effect on body
fatness are via the brain there are
actual experiments demonstrating this
and I'll explain how these experiments
work this is all in the scientific
literature so if you knock out the
leptin receptor only in the brain or
only in the hypothalamus you get
obesity so that is what tells us that
actually the brain is the key site of
action and particularly the spell train
it tells you Gary Gary Gary please let
him talk you let you talk yeah and
that's it so I mean you get the same
obesity if you knock leptin out of the
brain and particularly out of the
hypothalamus that you get if you knock
it out of the whole body so that shows
that the brain is the site of action
that is causing this to happen and this
is no surprise we have these mechanisms
worked out we know specific groups of
neurons that are receiving the left and
that are controlling our appetite that
are controlling our metabolic rate we
have many of these neural populations
worked out in mice we understand these
systems so well we can control specific
popular tiny populations of neurons very
precisely cause them to eat a ton to
stop eating to gain fat to lose fat like
the animals or marionettes I mean that's
the level of understanding we have right
now of how these systems work so I mean
all of this evidence is converging on
the same thing that the brain is central
and that that cell metabolism I'm just
not seeing the evidence for that I mean
Gary if you want to cite specific
evidence demonstrating that that is an
actual cause of differences in body
fatness between individuals and the
general population I'm awaiting that
evidence and I'm happy to sit here and
listen to you cite the evidence that
demonstrates that can cause her leptin
is produced where yeah leptin is
produced yeah let's talk about leptin a
little bit it's produced in fat cells
and it's produced in proportion to the
size of fat tissue so the amount of body
fat you have the more fat you have the
more leptin you have in the circulation
and basically what this is it's what's
called a negative feedback loop which is
a really simple engineering term that
works like a thermostat so with your
thermostat you if you set your
thermostat to 70 if it starts getting a
little bit of hotter your AC turns on to
bring it back down this starts getting
lower ac comes on or the heat comes on
to bring it up that's called the
negative feedback system it maintains
the stability
of the temperature of your house we have
many negative feedback loops in the
human body to regulate body temperature
to regulate blood pressure to regulate
all sorts of things one of the negative
feedback loops we have regulates body
fatness and the hormone so your
thermostat measures temperature by using
a thermostat sorry a thermometer your
brain measures body fatness using this
hormone leptin that's in the circulation
and then particularly when your body fat
level drops your leptin levels drop and
your brain hears that and it kicks in a
starvation response basically and this
is the main reason why weight loss is so
difficult because your brain is like no
I don't want to be losing fat and it
makes you hungrier it increases your yes
is that a certain level of body fat as
this so here's is just when you're
losing body fat in general like even if
you a large person that's overweight
rekd when you're losing body fat in
general your body exacerbate your hunger
and this is this is the thing that's
really important to understand about
obesity is that people with obesity have
a higher setpoint so it's like turning
your thermostat from 70 to 80 and then
your thermostats are regulating around
80 people with obesity they're not
regulating around 170 anymore they're
regulating around 250 and so when you
cause a lean person to lose weight you
see the same thing as when you cause a
person with obesity to lose weight you
see this reaction in their brain
circuits that regulate body fatness that
drives them to increase their cravings
and their hunger so metabolic rate drops
so it would be an evolutionary mechanism
to force you to seek food correct
and not just to force you to seek food
that's the main thing but it also slows
your metabolic rate does everything it
can to get more energy in your body and
have less leaving and it keeps doing
that until the fat comes back tonight
pause here yeah so when you're eating a
sugary diet a high high calorie diet you
will produce more fat your body will get
fatter right umm it depends on how many
calories you're okay if you're
overeating
yeah I'm consuming a lot of sugar a lot
of carbohydrates your body will get
fatter your body will produce more
leptin correct so it comes from the diet
yeah indirectly definite can I pause
please so the leptin is produced not
just in response to the size of the fat
cell but in response actually glucose
mediated uptake into the fat cell which
is mediated in part by insulin so you
come back to insulin even with the left
and you raise blood sugar and that's the
carbs you eat the carbs you raise
Fletcher you raise insulin you raise fat
storage the glucose and then you get
more leptin again one of the things you
have to understand about this is
everything that says has two
interpretations depending on which
paradigm you're looking at and these are
fundamentally different paradigms so in
Stefan's world and again correct me if
I'm wrong though leptin a signalling
fuel availability in fat cells the way I
would think of it and in my very small
world leptin is responding to fuel
availability in the rest of the cells so
it's basically a molecule that can tell
other cells that there's fat available
and you could burn that fat for fuel and
then you don't have to go eat or it can
tell that there isn't fuel available and
if depending on how much left and there
is the cells and then that will respond
by a signal to eat or not to dis inhibit
eating behavior everything we're talking
about with Stefan and I first sort of
fell out I don't know eight years ago at
ancestral health symposium when I acted
improperly inappropriately but one of
the problems I to the way I think you
should think about this you have a
hypothesis and this is the fundamental
thing is it obesity caused by overeating
because we know if you're getting fatter
you're storing more calories in your
expend that's just the you know it's
like if a room is getting more crowded
more people are entering them leaving
that is the simplest but it doesn't tell
you why the rooms getting crowded it
doesn't tell you why you're getting
fatter
and again what I've been arguing is the
why you're getting fatter part has been
left out and people decided that
overeating was somehow an explanation
and then they went to the brain to look
at why people might over
so what I one of the questions I asked
to find eight years ago and it keeps
coming up is if we're gonna blame
obesity on the modern food environment
epidemics of obesity
you know simple question to ask is can
we find epidemics of obesity without
this modern food environment I mean
that's the sort of science 101 right and
it turns out that the world is following
the first one I found in the literature
was in 1902 in a population of the Pima
Native American tribe the Pima living in
Arizona and observers saying these
people are poor they're malnourished
they're suffering through famines
they've been suffering through a famine
for 40 years in famines it's hard to
overeat during a famine and yet the
women of the tribe who do virtually all
the work they were treated as pack
animals in effect were obese so now we
can disassociate obesity from the modern
food environment and we could
disassociate it from this
ultra-processed foods we eat and start
to ask the question what is it about can
we find what might have driven obesity
in that population despite the existence
of famine so it's from very simple
observation once we get into these kind
of studies say this in human genome
studies say that I actually rarely do
that in my books because you can find
studies that will say anything and
you'll see in the studies people
misinterpreting them what was the cause
of the population of women to be obese
well so one thing that happened during
the faint beginning in the 1860s the
Pima were put on the reserve while they
moved on to Reza they were reservation
eyes whatever the verb form would be and
they began eating western foods and back
then it was sugar flour and lard for the
most part and sugary beverages probably
so that's a reasonable hypothesis and
you could find the same thing in the
Sioux Native American Sioux population
living on a reservation in 1928 where
you had Oh both obese men and women
living with malnourished stunted
children who clear
when getting enough dye but they were on
a reservation they were getting Western
foods so ultimately you know the
question you asked in science determines
the answer you get so the question I was
asking is we have this observation that
any population that transitions to
Western diet or Western diet and
lifestyle gets obese and diabetic they
develop what's called metabolic syndrome
which is insulin resistance and all
these issues and we know that's true all
over the world from the Inuit to the
Pima to South Pacific Islanders to
Africans to Europeans so the genetics
aren't that important the question is
what's triggering it in the environment
and again Stefan would say well there's
too much food available and it's too
palatable and we can't say no and I have
a lot of problems with that we can say
no part because if we're lean it means
they can't say no and they being the
people with obesity and I don't believe
that's true and then or is it some
specific item or some so spin this these
foods that travel with Western
populations and so the exists the
ability and today if you look up do a
burden of obesity and malnutrition I
have a Dropbox folder I could share with
you that's probably 50 studies all over
the world you see the same observation
incredibly poor populations malnourished
the children are stunted which means
their protein deficient and their
calorie deficient and often the mothers
or the aunts or obese the obesity tends
to run in the females would suggest it
has a female sex hormone related a fact
that I don't believe works in the brain
because we're dealing with populations
that could not have over eaten if they
could have over eaten why are the kids
starving that's sort of the question and
you know this was the first thing that I
think we fought about back then and it's
still if you can find populations with
obesity epidemics but without the modern
food system without snack wells and
without Lay's potato jims
and if you know that they're going
through a famine or you know that the
kids at least aren't getting a food how
do you explain obesity and the mothers
without assuming that the mothers are
overeat let's pause right there
Stefan is there a population of people
that are obese that are not eating a
Western diet that are not eating sugary
foods that are obese and that are not
eating sugary foods probably not because
generally once you have an
industrialized food system that's going
to include sugar but there are
populations that eat a lot of sugar and
are not obese and we should talk about
some of these excellent let's talk about
back to the yeah sure let's talk about
the Pima first now Gary has told a story
he's told his version of the Pima story
let me tell the story the version of the
story that appears in the scientific
literature
now the Pima originally they were
agriculturalists they were eating
traditionally a very high carbohydrate
diet based on unrefined carbohydrates
originally it was corn beans and squash
primarily they were hunter-gatherers and
agricultural they were primarily gary
okay they were primarily eating
agricultural foods they were also
collecting some wild foods that's
correct they were fishing and eating
mesquite pods primarily agricultural and
data are very clear on that Gary so yes
they are look we have data I can't say
things like that nothing because we're
going to disagree let's move on you
think they mostly fish that's incorrect
okay according to the data that's I
remember you saying that in your book
something to that effect that's and
agree but you've got my book anyway
let's go on we don't better I'm gonna
move on here now the Pima traditionally
were agriculturalists and what happened
basically is you had all these farmers
moving into their area settlers of
European descent and they diverted the
water from their River the Gila or Gila
River if you open up Gila and so they
were no longer able to grow there
drops their agricultural crops that they
were primarily dependent on and
therefore the government started
providing them with foods to eat and
these were calorie dense refined foods
they were like Gary said flour lard and
sugar and then they became very obese
when out there was a population of Pima
right across the border from them in
Mexico also very similar culturally and
all that that maintained their
traditional high carbohydrate lifestyle
an agricultural lifestyle and there have
been studies comparing those two
populations and the ones across the
border with their traditional lifestyle
are a lot leaner and healthier not
surprisingly than the ones eating lard
flour and sugar okay but Gary you seem
to believe that people can gain weight
you kept referring to famines and things
you seem to believe that people can gain
weight even if they are eating very few
calories and you refer to this many
times in your writing and you know these
are very casual observations that you're
making kind of these casual correlations
and storytelling but if you actually
look at the data on this what you see is
that if you just measure calorie intake
and people who have obesity it is 20 to
35 percent higher than people who are
lean after correcting for height
physical activity level and that I've
got references right we're getting a
little bit in seconds here let me give
you an agrarian umber seven what can I
pause you guys right here so these
people they have essentially the same
lineage one group lives in Mexico they
they're not eating these sugary foods
and this Western diet the ones that live
in America are the ones that live in
America are becoming obese the ones that
live in Mexico or not is that correct
correct yeah and so now if you have
someone with obesity like I've said the
most accurate measures that we have
suggests that they habitually consume
and expend more calories and now Gary's
model says that that is downstream of
the fattening effect it's not causing
the fattening effect it is a result of
the
effect whereas my model says that that
is actually required for the fattening
effect to occur it is upstream so now
what happened though what happens there
what happens if you reduce their calorie
intake by that same amount twenty to
thirty five percent it doesn't matter if
you do it by restricting carbs or fat
these experiments have been done they
lose weight when you restrict their
calorie intake down to that this is the
argument what you're saying that you
keep consuming low amounts of calories
but high amounts of sugar does it
doesn't make sense you can get obese
that way so you're saying it's a calorie
yeah correct and that's reference number
nine and ten to support what I just said
and I want to talk about another one
that right wait can we out on stage its
but I the reason I was using the dual
burden example is because we have to
explain how those women were eating all
those calories usually women again it's
just often they was interrupting these
studies were done by diabetes
researchers that were studying diabetes
in these populations and the men had
high levels of diabetes and the women
had high levels of obesity to give you
an example where that measurement was
done um in Trinidad in the nineteen
sixties and again all I'm doing this is
the role I played as I asked the
question can you find populations that
don't have a lot of food okay you could
say that the obese expend a lot of
energy and they eat a lot of calories
the question is can they get obese
without a lot of food and so can we find
populations like us can you find a
population that gets obese without sugar
which was exactly the question to ask
so in Trinidad in the 1960s as a
malnutrition crisis the US government
sends a team of researchers down to
study this and the researchers come back
and say yeah there's malnutrition there
stunting there's deficiency diseases and
two-thirds of the adult women are obese
and this is a medical problem and the
next year an MIT nutritionist goes down
to do exactly what Stefan asks for and
to actually measure the diets and obese
women and lean women and to study it and
this is a population whether it's it's
unlike them this is a very poor Trinidad
and population and reports that they I
think it was 1800 calories a day what
the obese woman reading was actually a
little
somewhat the lien people seem to be
eating and that it was lower than what
the Food and Agriculture Organization
considered for a healthy diet
so again what my role in this is to
point out when you have populations like
that I don't see how the overeating
hypothesis tells me the brain is in
control of how much they eat tells me
anything about why the women were obese
especially when their kids are starving
this is the paradox of this doom burden
and obese mother with a starving child
if the obese mother has to eat
superfluous calories to get fat why
isn't you given those calories to her
kids because you need him she clearly
doesn't mean she's got fuel so what's
going on there if you posit a hypothesis
as I did which says that the obesity is
triggered by the macro nutrient content
of the diet then you can explain I mean
there are plenty of animal models a
famous quote I use in my books from Sean
my year it was like the same leading
Harvard nutritionist who studied an
obese train of animals in the 50s he
said my animals will get fat even when
half starved they will make fat out of
their food even when half starved these
are generally animals with mutations in
the leptin it doesn't whatever by the
way whatever and the question is if Mike
I can make fat out of my food at levels
of the caloric levels that for instance
a lean person can't then I'm going to
get fat eating the same amount and that
fat accumulation is going to be you know
means I'm taking more calories and I
expend but the point is I'm from some
metabolic hormonal reason I'm taking the
fuel I eat and turning it into fat and
storing it in the fat tissue what is
your responsibility yeah so my response
is that if you want the best answers you
have to use the best methods to answer
it to answer the questions okay do you
want a question answered properly you
have to use accurate methods to answer
that question now as you know Gary it's
very difficult to measure food intake in
free living individuals particularly
you're traveling to a country you've
never been to before it's very difficult
to get accurate measures so just because
some guy went to Trinidad and claimed a
woman actually okay fine just because
some woman went to Trinidad and claimed
that people were eating 1800 calories
and becoming obese does not mean that
that's what actually happened now no no
no no Gary I'm responding now we have
studies where researchers used accurate
measures to measure calorie intake in
people who had obesity many of these
people were saying we're only eating
1200 calories a day when they actually
measured their calorie intake what they
found was that they were consistently
eating more calories than lean people so
this this phenomenon that Gary describes
is something that is only observed when
inferior methods are used measure
calories weight defent the reason I'm
using these populations like I said I'm
just giving you an observation obese
mother with a starving child the dual
burden of malnutrition obesity this
isn't one observation it's not one
nutritionist the existence of the
starving children strongly suggests that
there's not a lot of food available and
we have to explain obesity in the model
you know I would like you to respond
okay fine I will respond to that now
look I haven't looked at these studies
in particular I brought them up eight
years ago we got in the fight about
eight years ago it ruined our you know
it's like art we used to be biting on it
so now look there are many reasons why a
child could be malnourished in a
non-industrial situation and this is I
do a lot of work related to this what
you see in non industrial situations you
see a lot of infectious disease you see
a lot of malnutrition
so people not getting enough essential
minerals and vitamins not getting enough
protein and you see a lot of children
who are just barely hanging on because
of this collection of really bad stuff
that's happening in their lives and
set-asides things yeah yeah parasites
malaria I don't know if there's malaria
in Trinidad or not but I mean all
diarrhea pneumonia these are the things
that we all had before we had modern
great sanitation and in a country like
the United States 30% of kids didn't
even make it past childhood and so
there's a lot of things that could have
caused that Gary it's not necessarily
because you know it's not necessarily
the reason that you attribute it to now
I'm not attributing it to a reason I'm
just ask okay well great well I I don't
have the explanation but I'm throwing
out possibilities that are alternative
to the one that you're implying it's
quite possible okay so now I so again
when you use accurate measures of
calorie intake you find that these
people with magical metabolisms who have
obesity and don't eat very much seem to
not exist anymore and furthermore I want
to I want to get to another type of
study that's really going to
differentiate between this metabolic
effect driven by insulin and the effect
of calories so we have a lot of studies
that compared diets in which calories
were the same but carbohydrate and fat
intake differed and the ones that I
really want to focus on right now that I
think are key here are the studies where
they increased calorie intake so they
fed people they they one study in
particular and see I'm gonna give you a
number here see if I can give you a
number here sorry
while you look at that um can we bring
up another issue because what we're
talking about ultimately is why people
get fat okay I don't I don't want to
divert here I'm in the middle of
something so um now if we want to
understand why people get fat we can
look at studies that overfed people on
fat or carbohydrates exclusively so this
one study the first one that I want to
talk about first they figured out
people's baseline calorie intake figure
out how many calories they needed just
to maintain and then they increase that
by 50% by exclusively giving them fat or
exclusively giving them carbohydrate
okay I thought it was so this is Horton
okay um yeah so number 16 number 16 so
now if Gary's hypothesis is correct
these people should have gained body fat
on the carbohydrate overfeeding but not
the fat overfeeding because that
increases your insulin has these effects
on your fat cells etc okay now these
were very rigorous studies I want to
emphasize that and I pause here did they
monitor the the actual calories they got
correct yes they were they were they had
a baseline they use prisoners and they
per month state prison no that's
incorrect different study so they had a
baseline and did they require them to
maintain the same diet and then add
additional fat or additional
carbohydrates yes and then they just
bump it up with fat way way up with
carbohydrate Horten there wasn't Sims it
was Ethan Sims what's the money that was
which study did you do that was not
prisoners what was the he didn't have a
metabolic you know what let me just
finish describing this study not Gary
that's an irrelevant detail okay it
what's relevant is that you just didn't
implied that I don't know we're talking
a parry alright you know what
I don't actually know maybe it was in
prisoners thank you all right you're
welcome now but it was not the Sims
overfeeding study that was done in
prisoners that's what I know okay okay
so and what's a reference yeah it's on
my website you can go to my website
stefan Guillen a calm and it's reference
number sixteen and they're both there
okay so this was what's called a
metabolic Ward study where these people
were in a research facility where the
researchers could monitor and control
every morsel of food so there was no
cheating no inaccuracy and they were
measuring changes in body fatness using
a gold standard method called underwater
weighing okay and so what they found was
that at the end of a two-week period of
over feeding the carb and the fat groups
gained the exact same amount of body fat
exact same amount of body fat
there was another second study that did
the same thing and found the same result
independent lab group very similar
experiment three week long instead of
two weeks they found the exact same
thing same amount of fat gain different
insulin responses different amounts of
carbohydrates
that exact same amount of fat gain so
this demonstrates that insulin is not
and carbs are not what controls what
gets fat into fat tissue calorie intake
is what controls that so let me explain
again remember I talked about everything
the paradigm you work and determines the
question you ask and this experiment is
a classic example because they assume
that people get fat by overfeeding so
then they say if we over feed them we're
just doing what happens naturally
everything about the experiment is based
on the assumption that they're supposed
to be testing which is can people get
fat by overfeeding and so that from the
very conception of the experiment
they've built in the paradigm that we
want to test the hypothesis on top of it
if it's a typical Simmons experiment I
actually wasn't familiar with this one
Oh was a it wasn't Simms was a James O
and JC Peter James Hill was funded for
the from about 1998 to about 2008 by
Procter & Gamble because he was in
olestra shil I hate to say that Jim I
apologize but I think it's a fair
assessment and then when he stopped
being funded by Procter & Gamble he was
funded by the sugar industries and JC
Peters was the head of the Procter &
Gamble olestra olestra which is now
something that no one needs yeah Lester
was a fat substitute and the problem was
he got like run out like that but the
whole idea of olestra was to replace fat
in the diet so every study Helen Peters
did implicated dietary fat as a cause of
obesity I don't think we could ever use
I hate to say and I mean typically I
I don't think funding influences results
but I wouldn't use in James Hill study
to make that point that because you
think it's a bio study that was in
everything hell everything Helen Peters
did can anyone knows I mean I talked
about this in good calories bad calories
when they reported their results
actually I did a FOIA on James Hill cuz
he works for the University of Colorado
so you could actually and I got all his
documents back and forth between him and
a lesser I'd be happy to share them with
you if you'd like there
Rabelais timing him and Procter & Gamble
but he basically held Procter and Gamble
for ransom he would get a $500,000
unrestricted gift and then he would do a
study and then he would ask and it would
conclude that fat is bad and carbs are
good and therefore olestra is a viable
product then he would ask for Procter
and Gamble for more money before he then
published study so it's a particularly
egregious example of someone who's I
suspect it was just his belief system he
believed dietary fat was bad fat causes
obesity olestra is a good thing because
you eat that instead of fat you don't
absorb it and in every study he did
confirm that the point that we keep
getting away from that I haven't had an
opportunity to and Stefan knows as well
as I do if you're gaining say four
pounds a year of fat let's say between
20 and 40 you've put on 40 extra pounds
so now you're obese or nice lean healthy
young guy in 20 like many of us wore and
by the time you're 40
you've got 40 pounds of excess fat
that's the equivalent of putting in
about the 10 calories as head storing
about 10 calories a day into your fat
tissue that you don't burn a metabolize
so you eat say 2700 calories a day half
carbs you know 35% fat 15% protein and
10 calories that they get trapped in
your fat tissue less than a bites worth
of food less than a sips worth of beer
so the question are actually trying to
ask is or answer and this is again just
my approach is a curious journalists do
with a science background this how do we
explain those 10 calories because when
we talk about those obese women with
starving children all those obese woman
were doing was storing 10 or 20 calories
a day depending on how quickly they
became obese and those populations that
tends to happen quickly in their 20s so
we're asking this question how do we if
you've got a situation where we have to
end up with 10 calories stuck in the fat
cells every day that's a 20 34
a billion fat cells so it's divided up
very small and is the brain somehow
regulating that or again is there dis
regulation in the body involving pick
your hormones pick your enzymes when
knowing that somehow traps fat in the
fat cells or prevents the fat from being
used for fuel when it's released from
the fat cells and so if you think about
it that way like you let yourself go to
seed
today Joe Rogan decides I'm done I'm
gonna do nothing but drink beer and you
might start drinking five beers a day
and over the course of 10 years you get
20 pounds and it's all here that 20
pounds over the course of 10 years it's
still only about 20 calories you might
have added 800 calories of beer to your
diet and stored 20 calories as fat how
does that happen and why does it go here
and not elsewhere and as Stefan said
this is insulin dependent fat tissue so
those are that's when we're talking
about this like this question could
somebody get fat during a famine or can
they stay fat during a famine all they
have to do is hold on to ten calories a
day extra if they're only eating 1210
gets stuck in their fat cells 1190 is
excreted or expended it's not that hard
to imagine and there's nothing in the
laws of physics that says it so what
could be dysregulated about their fat
cells even during a relative famine not
a complete famine but a relative famine
that might be and again animal
experiments of which there are probably
hundreds by now different animal models
you can disassociate obesity from hype
from eating too much in the animal can I
pause you for a second
so essentially you're saying that even
if someone is taking in a a good amount
of calories a smart amount of calories
2,000 calories a day if you're taking in
these calories in the form of sugar your
body is going to take a certain
percentage of them even if you're
getting enough food and stored as fat
whereas if you were taking in too
protein and vegetables and things along
those lines your body would not do that
well so this is a gets to the mechanism
yes and and the evidence question but
you're saying that right so you're
saying that if two people are on the
same diet one of us on two thousand
calories of chicken and fish and
vegetables and the other one is on two
thousand calories of milkshakes and you
know sugary drinks and pasta and
bullshit that that person is going to
gain a certain amount of calories and
just put them to fat right regardless
that's yeah that's I've seen a city this
being a science that hypothesis can be
tested yes and there's Stefan thinks
it's been tested I think it's they've
done a bad job of testing it and we will
both tend to reject the studies that we
don't like when we define don't like by
whether or not they got the answer we
think it's your perspective that this is
not the case your perspective is that
like as you were saying in this study
with a closely monitored these people's
diets and they added an additional fat
and an additional carbohydrates that
they both gained the same additional
amount of work that's right I mean if
this is correct you have to see
different levels of fat gain I mean Gary
short-term studies yeah it was short
term wasn't two in three weeks that's
very short yeah it is very short term
but still bonus yeah he says that
insulin is the thing that gets fat in
fat cells and that I mean you would see
some kind of difference that insulin
made any difference it should have seen
some kind of effect right some kind of
difference in fact games well actually
um I don't want to start taking out
charts but this gets into insulin
dynamics that was worked out so over a
hey I promised I wasn't gonna say oh boy
boy on the show but it's my thanks to my
Brooklyn born mother it's my program
then um and they the same is true a lot
of these overfeeding experiments do the
same thing so when they talk about
overfeeding they they they literally
over feed so they kind do reasonable way
of figuring out which reading is Stefan
said they measure
they calculated how much energy they
needed to stay in energy and balance and
again right there that's a problem
because one of the hypotheses says that
the energy balance is dependent on the
macro nutrient content of the food so
you're going to get a different
different level depending on what the
macronutrient content is and then a
different level of what what's necessary
for energy balance so the classic
example is a study that's my
not-for-profit funded that's been very
controversial where they got their
subjects this is David Ludwig and Cara
Ebeling and they're their colleagues at
Harvard and Boston Children's Hospital
and they did this study in Framingham
and they they basically got subjects to
lose ten or twelve percent of their body
weight and then they randomized them to
three different diets of three different
macronutrient compositions and they
basically calculated their energy
expenditure on the three different diets
which is kind of exactly what we're
talking about because if you want to be
an energy balance you know you feed
people exactly what they're expending
and in that study which was published a
year ago and they saw different levels
of energy expenditure depending on the
carbohydrate content of the diet so the
higher level of carbohydrates this is
trying to keep them at energy balance
the the higher the carbohydrate the
lower the energy expenditure the lower
the carbohydrate the higher the energy
expenditure so again it's just whether
or not they did the study right who
knows
science is a compilation of a lot of
studies and we're trying to you know
address exactly this point but merely
building that into the experiment we
know what their energy expenditure
should be and then the point is when you
increase and par again part of the trick
of doing science is to say look we have
competing hypotheses multiple hypotheses
and it's vitally important that you
always keep the multiple hypotheses in
mind when you're interpreting this study
so one hypothesis says it's how much
they eat and another hypothesis says
it's what they eat and that what they
eat is is moderated primarily through
insulin and when you do these
experiments like the experiment that
that Stephen is talking about Stefan um
I'm completely confused
if you over feed them you start out with
a 50% carb diet now you overfeed them if
there's a threshold effect on insulin
which it turns out there is then you're
just moving them and when you look at
insulin dynamics when insulin is below a
very low point that fat cells will
mobilize fat and the lean tissue will
burn it for fuel above that point you
get pretty much flat so if you start
people who are eating 1,500 calories for
carbs and you add them bump them up to
2500 calories from carbs you're still in
the plateau beside of the insulin you
wouldn't necessarily expect to see any
difference mm-hmm the only way you
expect to see a difference and this way
it helps to really interrogate both
hypotheses so that you know when you're
doing the experiment whether or not
you're actually testing something you
one hypothesis you want to set up the
experiments that the hypothesis predicts
the two hypotheses predicts something
entirely different
this experiment with arguably the two
hypotheses predict the same thing you'll
get fat gained because insulin is
elevated regardless and when insulin is
elevated you're gonna get fat gain the
question comes back to of this again
always if I'd want to keep this in mind
we want to what could possibly cause a
10 or 20 calorie access that causes fat
stored I have a friend that was four to
four hundred pounds when he was 18 it
was a tall kid about six foot five he
was a say 200 pounds overweight 200
pounds overweight is roughly a hundred
excess calories over 18 years stored in
your fat cells that's you know even if
you assume that you have to consume 300
calories to have 100 excess stored in
your fat cells that's you know one to
coca-cola's a day that he was drinking
or 1/2
a quarter pound or a day that he was
eating that his lean friends weren't and
the question would be why can't he just
stop doing that again Stefan would say
cuz his brain won't let him and I would
say because his insulin is elevated
doesn't matter whether he stops it or
not the underlying mechanism okay
alright so now again it's easy to tell
stories it's not easy to tell stories
that are supported by scientific
evidence now I want to bring people's
attention to reference number eleven on
my site there have been 29 studies now
that have measured differences in energy
expenditure metabolically a panel study
meta-analysis correct there have been 29
studies to date that have measured
calorie expenditure metabolic rate on
diets differing in carbohydrate and fat
content and when you put all those
studies together when you are at least
the first 28 together and you look at
what the overall literature says it
makes almost no difference to metabolic
rate whether people are eating
carbohydrate or fat and in fact this
very small difference that it does make
actually favors high carbohydrate diets
so you get a slightly higher metabolic
rate when the diet is predominantly
carbohydrate now this study that gary
cited is the one study out of these 29
that has reported a larger effect than
any others of carbohydrate restriction
on energy expenditure so this study
reported an effect bigger than any of
these other 28 and while difference we
want Gary please thank you and and
interestingly if you actually look at
the data and these data have been
realized by a researcher named Kevin
Hall and if you look at the data you
find that some of the participants some
of the data that represents some of
these participants are literally
physically impossible they break the
first law of thermodynamics this is the
conservation of energy Gary knows about
this he has a physics background and
they literally don't add up and when you
start subtracting the
clearly erroneous data from the pool of
subjects this big effect size starts to
shrink and shrink and shrink and shrink
until after you've gotten rid of all of
it this study does no long no longer
reports a higher energy expenditure on a
very low carbohydrate diet and it's
consistent with the previous 28 studies
that were done so that's my perspective
on that but I want to go back to this
way there's no known about there you saw
her a long time and I'm gonna talk for
as long as I want now I want to I want
to talk about human energy metabolism
and this idea of the ten extra calories
a day Gary I
I really continue to get the feeling
that you do not understand human
energetics because that's not how it
works but now I'm just saying ten
calories stored in the fat tissue chain
can automatic 10 calories say anything
about and what you have to eat I'm not
done okay no but you're insulting Gary
you got to stop doing that dude
you're acting like you think I'm an
idiot all right are you done now are you
done
can we be clear that we're talking about
you done now can I just finish this no
you can shout Gary's fine you can
respond write down notes on what you
want to respond to and after he's done
you can yeah but we're gonna get on this
thing that's not the point
yeah thank you okay now what you see
there's basically two things you need to
pay attention to here in terms of
energetics one is the imbalance between
intake and expenditure and that is very
small
so it only takes a little bit of extra
calories to cause somebody to start
gaining fat however as they gain fat
their bodies get bigger they're gaining
fat and lean mass people with obesity
have more fat more lean mass and their
calorie needs go up and up and up and up
the larger their bodies get and so even
though the imbalance between energy and
taking expenditure is small their
calorie needs end up being quite a bit
higher can I pause for a sec yeah so
you're saying that someone just gaining
calories eating additional calories
their body gains lean mass as well
that's as fast as the brain regulate the
I didn't say it regular so fascinating
but how does the three muscle muscle
through gaining muscle to some of its
muscles some of its okay as they're
carrying around this extra weight and so
the extra calories and then on top of
that carrying around the extra weight
forces their body to grow larger
presumably I'm actually not sure what
the mechanism is but it doesn't have
nothing to do with the brain that's a
coincidence I don't know what it causes
it that's what I'm saying Gary okay now
so so but the point is by the time the
person has obesity they are consuming
twenty to thirty five percent more
calories than they were when they were
lean so that's not just a one or two
cokes a day that is allowing them to
remain obese they are consuming twenty
to thirty five percent more calories
that is what the most accurate studies
are saying and so it's not just ten
extra calories or maybe just one or two
cokes we're talking about a substantial
amount of extra calories and it's not a
generalization because we don't know I
mean what's the ratio of how much fat
people get how much weight people are
gaining everybody gains a different
amount of weight like you're saying
they're eating twenty to thirty percent
more calories like who is like how many
people get fat they get 20 pounds
overweight people get fat they get a
hundred pounds overweight they mean yeah
that's right yeah and that's why I give
a range because what you see is that
people who are overweight so they're in
the overweight range and just have some
extra fat they eat about ten percent
extra calories people who have a little
bit of obesity eat about twenty percent
extra calories people who have who are
very have very very great obesity eat
more like 35 percent so it tracks with
the amount I'm sorry is it possible what
he was saying that if you do consume 10
extra calories over long periods of time
that will accumulate no it's not extra
calories you're accumulating than 10
hours that said like Kent a dime is
going it is saying so how much do you
have to deposit is credit on right it is
correct that if every day you eat 10
calories more than what you need then
yes or your body so your body stores
yeah
we'll say that that's coring 10 percent
10 10 extra calories over top of what
you need but the thing is that as you
get bigger what you need goes up and up
and up because you're carrying around
more correct and so it's ten percent in
ten extra Cal it's re not percent it's
ten extra calories on top of the
elevated amount that you're already
eating so you end up with these big
differences in calories to take so
that's how that's how it really works
but I want to talk about some
interesting observations because Gary
you like to talk about you know what's
going on in different dietary trends and
different cultures and I find that
pretty interesting too I want to talk
about the fact that sugar intake in the
United States has been declining for the
last 20 years so it peaked in 1999 and
it is currently depending on which
source of evidence you believe 15 to 23
percent lower than it was in 1999 this
has been corroborated by a number of
different sources of evidence this
number 17 on my blog and of course we
know that obesity has increased diabetes
has increased substantially over the
last 20 years in the percentage of the
population or our members percentage
yeah and in UK sugar intake has been
declining for 50 years I don't believe
that okay well you can argue with the
data there number 17 on my blog there
about 22 percent lower and this is what
we see across a number of different
industrialized countries you see a
stagnation or decline in sugar intake in
recent decades as obesity rates are
continuing to increase and of course
that 50-year period that covers the
decline in the UK covers the entire UK
obesity and diabetes epidemics but
there's another one I want to talk about
that and I respond to that yeah we
should probably Stefan actually I'll let
you respond for me because we had this
debate with the Cato foundation to you
know my art counter argument you want to
give it yeah sure absolutely I mean are
you sure you want to let me give it
though I might correct it okay all right
so your counter-argument is that
the amount of sugar that we consumed 20
years ago or even maybe 50 years ago
maybe continuing to fatten us today and
it's about the sugar that we used to eat
20 or 50 years ago and not necessarily
about the sugar we eat today well it's
not exactly right okay I guess so the
argument I made was because he brought
this up and we've had to do a written
debate on the Cato Foundation website
and it's interesting if you think about
use tobacco as an example so tobacco
smoking per capita smoking in America
peaked in 1965 right after the Surgeon
General's report and it took 30 years
before lung cancer rates turned over
okay and I think we both agree that
cigarettes were a major cause of lung
cancer smoking so what you basically
have is a system in which if there are
any there's the assumption that Stephan
is making when he quotes this kind of
data is that the relationship between
sugar and obesity is linear so as sugar
goes up obesity and diabetes goes up and
if sugar turns over they don't so here's
the thought experiment they used in Cato
which is 1965 were smoking per capita
about 20 cigarettes a day as it starts
to come down imagine we only cut that to
17 cigarettes or 16 cigarettes a 20%
reduction in smoking would you expect to
see a reduction in the lung cancer rates
again this is the point I made about
what you would expect to see rather than
you think simplistic metaphors so the
question is would you like Joe we go
from 20 to 16 do you expect to see the
lung cancer rates turn over no no and in
sugar we see them drop no you might the
derivative might drop you might expect
it to slow a tiny bit still use it
there's a but weird comparison because
one of them is poison the other one's
food right well but in this case the
food the question is how toxic is the
food so in sugar we have a variety and
sugar what happened is the equivalent of
going from 20 cigarettes to 16 beginning
in 1999 and Stefan is saying I would
expect to see an immediate change in
obese and in fact if you actually look
at the Ray
the the rate of increase the prevalence
appeared to plateau around six or seven
years later who knows whether that's
relevant but to get a small decrease in
sugar 24 even if it's 20 percent that's
20 to 16 cigarettes and I'm saying the
other factor that I talked about my book
and Stefan knows this is you very
clearly have maternal transmission of
the propensity to obesity and diabetes
so there's a generational effect this is
and this is studies that were done in
the same on the same Pima the same
Native American tribe or each generation
if gets more and more susceptible to
whatever it is in the diet that's
triggering and obesity and diabetes so
that's been happening in the United
States and around the world you've got a
generational effect that could last far
longer or might even keep going
indefinitely even if the sugar levels
drop so you have the sugar quit kicking
off the obesity epidemic and yeah and
stephon's about to say this is a story
and it is a story but it's clearly the
case that mothers who are obese during
pregnancy or diabetic or just stationary
diabetic they become diabetic during
pregnancy or they have metabolic
syndrome they're just insulin resistant
or they gain a lot of weight and
pregnancy will give birth to children
who are at higher risk of becoming an
obese and diabetic when they get older
and in younger ages and those children
will pass it on so again we have you
know I would be nice I would love it if
sugar consumption came down and with it
obesity and diabetes plummeted but it's
not in any way a refutation of this
hypothesis which I just want to state
what it is because people get confused
about and we never got to it there's
sugar hypothesis is a little different
than what we've been talking about and
it's pretty simple we have obesity and
diabetes epidemics worldwide as we talk
to it doesn't matter the genetics of the
population you add something about a
Western diet to those populations
Western diet and lifestyle you get these
explosions epidemics of obesity and
diabetes and what I'm hypothesize
in this book is that sugar is something
that has to be added maybe it's sugary
beverages for all I know maybe or it
could be you know a more complex
hypothesis a single possible one is you
add sugar to any populations diet
insufficient whether it's Southeast
Asians living on rice or the Inuit
living on reindeer and whatever or the
Native Americans of the Great Plains or
you know Caucasians living in the Upper
East Side Manhattan add enough sugar and
eventually through the metabolic effects
of the sugar and the generational
effects you will get explosions of
obesity and diabetes and metabolic
Stephanie want to respond to that sure I
mean Gary you called it man
it's always possible to tell a story to
salvage your hypothesis but that doesn't
necessarily make the story correct I
mean I can come up with a story that
cosmic rays cause obesity by hitting my
fat cells and making them fat you can't
disprove that nobody here can disprove
that but there's no an experiment to
protect you father we don't have the
data right now you don't have data
supporting your hypothesis no we do you
just dismiss no no no no well can I get
back to the Novotel stammers let's let
him respond them on the Kevan Hall later
yeah so what do you think about what
he's saying about sugar and increased
rates of diabetes and that this is the
cause yeah I mean so let me put it this
way we don't have any evidence
supporting what he just said so that is
a story that is not supported by
evidence now does it does that mean that
it's definitely incorrect no I cannot
say that that's definitely incorrect
same way I can't say it's definitely
incorrect that cosmic rays cause obesity
but you know I'm gonna I'm gonna use a
Christopher Hitchens quote here that
which is asserted without evidence does
not require evidence to refute and
that's the way I feel about this
particular story but you know there are
cultures that consume large amounts of
sugar and do not develop obesity we've
talked about yeah we're going to talk
about it again right now
so this is reference number 21 on my
blog I'm going to talk about three
different cultures one of which we have
not talked about Gary the first one is
the hodza hunter-gatherers of Tanzania
this is a really interesting non
industrial culture they as part of their
hunter-gatherer diet eat a lot of honey
honey is a very common food among
hunter-gatherers living similarly to how
our ancestors used to live and if you
measure their year-round honey intake
it's about 15% of their calories so this
is a major calorie source for them
that's about as much sugar as as the
average American eats and they eat fruit
sugar on top of this they eat a lot of
fruit on top of that and so they're
eating quite a bit of sugar and the
hodza men have about 12% body fat
women have about 18 so they correspond
pretty closely to our Western ideals but
isn't that high 400 gatherers no not
really I mean that's higher than me
hanging around bland ask you this how
have you had your body fatness measured
well had it measured a bunch of ways
electricity I've had this machine where
you hold on to these things you stand on
this platform okay so in physician's
office of okay so with calipers the most
okay so all the methods that you measure
that you mentioned are not gold standard
methods so the gold standard methods are
underwater weighing and the underwater
weighing these people on this island
actually I'm not sure I'm not sure how
that they bring that equipment to this
island correct but okay look um I can
tell you that you can look up photos I
don't remember how they how they
measured their body fat but you can look
I am 12% as measured by DEXA so I'll
just tell you that okay so you can get a
sense of what 12% is by DEXA which is a
gold standard method so you can look at
photos of these people they're very fit
they're lean they're not like ripped you
know they're not Arnold Schwarzenegger
in peak form but they are no I
understand that but that seems to
correlate with a higher consumption of
sugar that they seem to have a higher
percentage of body fat than the average
hunter-gatherer now look at a lot of
that average hunter-gatherers like a
friend
does a lot of work with the pygmies in
the Congo and they're very lean okay so
these backs and that's the second
culture I was gonna cite that you know
kind of honey do that yeah them if
they're the same ones some abuti pygmies
of the congo they eat up to eighty
percent of their calories can come from
honey during the rainy season so they
also eat a lot of honey and Arlene not
just leave the year correct yeah
for them it's part of the year the hodza
eat it more consistently and the hodza
have low levels of body fat their
cardiovascular risk markers are
excellent they don't have diabetes same
for but this is absolutely not like a
controlled study in the consumption not
I absolutely agree with you and that's
exactly the point I'm trying to make is
that when you have a culture that is
eating a lot of sugar but everything
else is in place they're doing
everything else right the sugar is not
enough to make them fat it's not
single-handedly enough I'm not saying it
doesn't contribute
I think sugar does contribute just to be
very clear I think sugar does contribute
to obesity and diabetes and
cardiovascular disease but it's not
single-handedly responsible as gary has
argued so the third culture is pretty
interesting the Kuna of Panama and the
reason they're interesting is that they
actually aren't eating honey they're
actually eating white sugar so they're a
culture that they live primarily a non
industrial lifestyle they're farmers and
hunter-gatherers and they but they do a
little bit of trade and one of the
things they trade for is sugar and they
eat sugar sweetened foods as well so
like doughnuts and pastries and they
drink soda and kool-aid what what is
their lifestyle in terms of like what do
they have a natural lifestyle they are
hunter-gatherers and subsistence farmers
so they're you know living a physically
active natural lifestyle so this is the
problem in comparison with any
westernized civilization that you you
you burn off so many more cowards like
100 cent agree with you and I think that
is exactly the point I'm trying to make
is that it's more complicated than just
sugar and
more complicated than just sugar but
with a normal lifestyle it may not be
this is you know I think the consumption
is the thing about burning of the
calories is also the the glucose demands
the glycogen demands on the muscle your
your not just existing like the web one
of the problems with Western lifestyle
is that many people are just existing
there sitting in a chair they're walking
to a desk they're sitting in their car
they're not doing anything to burn any
of this shit off so even if you have
like if you get a baseline of a minimal
amount of calories that you require for
the day I think what Gary's getting at
is that if you if you have this
lifestyle the lifestyle that many of us
have and then with that lifestyle
consume sugar that you're going to get
fat I don't think you can compare that
to athletes and in that respect I don't
think you can compare that to
hunter-gatherers because you're
requiring there's a much more
significant load on your body you like
when I did this sober October fitness
challenge with my friends during October
and we I was working out four hours a
day and I was fucking eating everything
that moved
I was drinking soda I never drink soda
yeah I was eating cookies I didn't gain
any weight other than muscle I didn't
get any fat at all
yeah and I was eating a terrible fucking
daya but I was going crazy when you're
trying to stay alive and you're running
around plowing and growing foods and
hunting and gathering and fishing you're
burning off insane amounts of calories
just the hiking that's required the
amount of exercise it's required it's
off the charts in comparison to standard
Western lifestyle we are on the same
wavelength here I mean I completely
agree with you that it is more
complicated than just sugar yeah and but
if you read what Gary is written and
please correct me if I'm wrong here Gary
argues that sugar is the primary cause
of obesity and that physical activity
does not matter calorie intake does not
matter do you think that physical
activity doesn't matter and I think it's
a no I don't think it makes a lot of
difference for fat when we're talking
about the cause of
P City I don't believe obese people get
obese because they're sitting but let me
tell put it this way so if you take
someone who's an elite athlete and they
start consuming a lot of sugar but they
they ramp up their exercise accordingly
like say if someone does what I did
during the sober October they're working
out three four hours a day every day do
you don't think that they have higher
sugar demands and that their body would
just burn that off no absolutely I think
that if there's a real benefit to
exercise it's burning off the
carbohydrates you consume then and you
need less insulin to do it can I respond
to the Kuna get back to them for a
second okay I mean one of the the issues
I have was Stefan as he writes off my
stories is stories which they are all
science begins as stories on hypotheses
and then what you do is go look for the
evidence and then he quotes studies and
refers to it as evidence as though this
is somehow by calling it evidence that
may and then we had this discussion a
year and a half ago and you didn't
disagree with me at the time and it had
no influence I'm just going to read from
the email I wrote emails it's gotten to
that point in the conversation because
it's I'm not only going to read from the
email if I have time I'm going to read
from your book read the Kuna the study
you cited is interesting okay so this
was a study that professed to measure
sugar intake of this population on an
island
Lagaan D and compared to the population
in Veracruz where they they had
emigrated and I say but they're added
sugar intake on ala Gandhi according to
figure one is 25 teaspoons per week plus
the equivalent of 24 ounces of sodas at
78 grams if it's Coke 32 ounces of
kool-aid that's 96 grams said I'm
leaving out the cup of a sugar cane
because I don't know what that is meant
but or how they assess it one way the
other it's not processed sugar so it's
roughly 274 grams of sugar per week or
about 32 pounds per year now that alone
is very low intake and we don't know how
it changed over the years so we have no
idea if it's increasing recently or been
low for years so you just use the Kuhn
as an example of a population he's a lot
of sugar and stated it dogmatically but
a lot of sugar is 32 pounds a year and
then I said wait hold on and I thought
you did that's what I heard if we
believe this study the Kuna and Veracruz
are consuming roughly the same amount
but I'm not sure I believe this study
when it comes to the Veracruz population
do you really think these urbanized Kune
are consuming only 3/8 ounce sodas per
week so the implication was this
population of Caribbean Islanders
immigrates to Veracruz they move into
the city and they consume more sugar
back where they used to live because
they trade for it then when they get
into the city
so five glasses of kool-aid no candy no
icecream nothing I'd like to know more
about the urban Kuna before I accept
such an analysis is valid on top of this
as they say the analysis is done mostly
of women because quote the women were
available to study because they were at
home during the day
unquote so what were the men consuming
and what were the children consuming
when they weren't at home and was there
something magical about this freak food
frequency questionnaire and these
researchers that they captured it
accurately so this is what science is
you have studies you have evidence and
the question always is you've got
competing hypothesis does evidence
really speak to the hypothesis and I'm
one of my issues with Steven it's what
provoked are our initial discord is that
he's constantly citing studies that
don't actually either they only speak to
one hypothesis like the overfeeding
study or they're poorly constructed and
poorly done so even this hosta example
with the honey is something we discussed
an email very kindly and we went back
and forth and I said I don't actually
think it's a refutation because the
hypothesis I'm defending here the case
against sugar is you add sugar to any
populations native diet and you get
epidemics of obesity and diabetes so
here's a population that's been eating
honey for maybe thousands of years in
fact when they emigrated to this area
they may have added honey to their diet
and had obesity and diabetes then and
Steven point Zelman bulk obesity and
diabetes in a hunter gathers population
is a death sentence for the child and
for the mother who gives birth so you're
going to very quickly weed out anyone so
again it just comes back to this
question of does this
this is it a refutation the hypothesis
that I found a hunter-gatherer
population that eats a lot of honey and
is in fat and the answer is I don't
think so Stephen thinks it does you
could flip a coin all of this can be
settled with experiments one of the
experiments we did at new city so one of
the the metabolic problems that goes
along with obesity and diabetes is
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease it's
endemic it used to be 20 years ago if
you had alcoholic fatty if you had fatty
liver disease the doctor would and you
told the doctor you didn't smoke that
would assume you were lying now it's so
common and so common in children and
particularly common in Hispanic children
that it's clear it's not caused by
alcohol and the question is what causes
it because if you could create a fatty
liver with a macronutrient you could
probably create insulin resistance as
well and then this whole slew of
disorders including obesity and diabetes
so my not-for-profit funded a pilot
study where we just took 40 kids by the
researchers at UC San Diego and Emory
University in Atlanta took 40 kids who
had non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
and we randomized them into two groups
in one group we gave them the entire
family all the food they needed so they
could over eat to their heart's extent
but no added sugars in their diet
no sugary beverages and this study was
published in JAMA four months ago and
it's just it get rid of the sugar in the
diet the fatty liver disease resolves
you know it was pretty simple I could
they tells you nothing about mechanism
the kids lost a little bit of weight
maybe it was a weight loss the
conventional wisdom would be they just
ate less which I wouldn't be at all
surprised because they probably didn't
like the food as much without sugar in
it but these are the kinds of ways you
could test these hypotheses and problems
I have with like the meta-analysis
getting back to Kevin and Hall there's
two ways you could do science you could
say let's look at all the junk that was
done for 30 40 50 years let's find
everything we can that even vaguely
speaks to the experiment and ignore any
quality of the study so if it may be
asked it asks this question like we want
to know what happens when people do this
but in doing this we switch their you
know fat intake around fat and carbon
take around and then we can throw all
that garbage into a meta-analysis and
the one thing I'm pretty confident is
they did a poor job because of one study
I looked up the one with the biggest
effect they mistook kilojoules for
kilocalories so they reported that 400
kilocalorie decrease in energy
expenditure on the low-fat diet when was
a 400 kilojoules which is what's that
factor you know these numbers twenty
point one years yeah several of the
other studies where Jim Hill studies
we've talked about Jim how the biggest
studies were Jim Hill and the way we
approach it the not-for-profits say
you've got to understand what the
question is and you've got to design an
experiment to get the right answer
so when Stephan dismiss this Harvard
three names form now what's that fence
to follow dr. gaya nickname Stefan it's
really easy dude I just don't good names
um my name is Joe hi Gary dad I know hi
Joe the Stefan ultimately rejected this
study it's about a twelve million dollar
study that was done at Harvard based on
Kevin hall so these are two names it's
about three people out there who are
convinced that everything people like me
are saying is wrong or not everything
but most of it and they keep coming up
over and over again and they were so
Kevan Hall claims that he has refuted
the carbohydrate insulin model in his
studies so when a study comes out
supporting it he works to find out why
that study's wrong we all did the same
thing I did the same thing right here
with the kunais study explaining why I
don't find a meaningful but anyway
that's the thing if the goal was to do
the right study because ultimately you
got to remember what's on the line here
we have obesity and diabetes epidemics
I mean tragic shit is going on out there
I mean people you know these are
ruining lives there are overwhelming the
health care system and that the argument
I made is that for the past 50 years
basically people have thought a lot like
Stefan is thinking now dr. GNA and that
there appears to be another story that
could be true and what we have to do is
find out if it is true because people
are dying out there stuff ok
the first thing I want to say is that
this alternative explanation that Gary
is talking about has already been
investigated intensively including
studies that were funded by his own
organization new C two out of the three
studies that have been published on that
were clear reputations of hypotheses and
ended here no no I know you've got a
very is that the study Baraka Gary Gary
I representing them according to your
beliefs is not representing them
correctly okay now I've noticed a
remarkable correlation between studies
undermining your beliefs and you
thinking those studies are garbage and
we should talk about Jim Hill and his
studies a little bit because you know to
me just saying this guy has a conflict
of interest and then insinuating that
that makes the study bad if you can't
actually find a problem with the study
itself these were very rigorous studies
if you cannot point out I say cific the
problem with the study it was designed
with an assumption based on the
assumption of a suppose it wasn't
designed how Gary wanted it to be
designed if you cannot find a problem
with that study then you can't just
dismiss it by making these insinuations
that the person had a conflict of
interests okay I know into the problem
okay that's great Gary now I think that
the drive all right you're gonna be able
to respond in a moment now the Kuna I
think we should really get back to this
issue this non-industrial culture
because the primary basis for Gary's
book the case against sugar the primary
observation that underlies gares belief
on this is this observational
correlational thing that cultures when
sugar
into these cultures they become fat and
that is the common thread and in obesity
and so what I'm doing is I'm pointing
out a culture where sugar came in and it
did not make them fat and that's one of
three cultures I haven't even looked
that hard okay these are just three
cultures that I came across is probably
a bunch more that are eating high levels
of sugar but they're a tender look
southern to our homies and I think
pontius and again Joe explanation is
right on point there's a lot of other
things going on in these cultures and
it's more complicated than just sugar
that's exactly my point now I want to
talk about the Cuban economic crisis
this is reference number 22 from 1989
through 1995 the Cuban economy collapsed
and the price of food went way up the
price of gasoline went way up and so
people started focusing on these really
cheap foods Cuba was a major sugar
producer at the time I don't know if
they still are and so the intake of
sugar went way up intake of refined
carbohydrate went way up the diet became
77% carbohydrate primarily white rice
and sugar
28% sugar of their total calorie intake
so that's like double what Americans eat
now their calorie intake went down and
because of the lack of gasoline people
got really physically active because
they had to walk everywhere so now again
if this is this is a situation where we
can test Gary's hypothesis if gary is
right and calories don't matter only
refined carbohydrate and sugar matter
obesity should have gone through the
roof in this population over that period
of time what you actually see is that
the prevalence of obesity declined by
half so there was a 50% decline it went
from 14 percent to 7 percent over the
period of this increase in sugar intake
increase in refined carbohydrate intake
and you might think well these people
are just starving like crazy and that's
why obesity rate went down well we
actually have evidence on the rate of
underweight as well and so we can check
on that
the rate of underweight increase only
slightly went from 8% to 10% and so we
know these people weren't just totally
starving and what happened then was as
the diet rebounded as the economy
rebounded in the diet rebounded and
their diet shifted away from these
refined carbohydrates and sugar and back
to the normal diet that was higher in
fats and lower in carbohydrate lower in
sugar the obesity rate went right back
up as soon as they went back to their
normal diet and so I find this because
they were they were not walking as much
yeah I was the exercise and also just
their diet became richer again I mean if
you're eating a diet that's a very poor
diet eating like white rice and sugar I
mean it it's not like if that's most of
what if you're sitting there and on your
plate is a white rice and sugar you're
not going to be eating a ton of that and
getting fat as opposed to eating a
richer diet with more varied foods and
so this is a case where you have an
entire country testing Gary's hypothesis
and finding that basically the opposite
of what his hypothesis predicts Gary
let's go with the when he was refuting
the studies and you want this is a level
of discourse I didn't really want to get
into because that's a study that I'm
gonna have to read he's right I'm gonna
read it to try and figure out what the
problem is I remember looking at that
study and thinking there wasn't the kind
of data you're citing maybe there's
multiple studies put together but the
one study I looked at the kind of data
you're citing wasn't in there that this
is again a preferences or on my website
so have at it no I will but will be off
the air by then on the beginning of his
when he started talking there was
referencing some studies and you had a
problem with that well it did this whole
it's a game people playing again it's
why basically in my book I try not to
get into he said she said studies
because you never know how well they did
I think we both agree that there's a
reproducibility crisis in science and
some huge proportion of the studies are
just wrong whether they're experiments
or observations people sometimes aren't
very good at what they do and so anyone
in either business you have to Steven
likes to say I have
no evidence nothin damn it but
simultaneously people accuse me of
writing a 600 page book with 150 pages
of references that was too long to read
so there's clearly evidence for this
observation and this hypothesis my issue
with Stefan is that he speaks as though
he knows with this authority and so
again I would like to just read a little
bit from YouTube all because as I was
prepping for this before you do that
though he was referencing the human
situation I don't know what the reality
is before that when when he first
started talking he was referencing
things that you were stating that he was
saying what were you saying that uh the
you know the organization that supports
him actually refugio that was yes no no
the the new C studies yeah we're talking
about the new situations the first two
of which and we can get we can get into
detail on this on how those refuted
Gary's beliefs and I would say Gary is
about the only person who thinks they
did not refuse his beliefs the
scientific community is pretty unanimous
you can respond but but could you please
say what was what would the study
statement let me do it before he so the
first study is a pilot study that
depends what you look at to depend
whether or not it refuted your belief so
there again you have to understand this
world there are researchers who believe
one thing Kevin hall at NIH tends to
believe that obesity is an energy
balance problem and you people get fat
because they eat too much I hope I'm
doing Kevin justice and then there's
David Ludwig and his colleagues at
Harvard who tend to believe what I
believe and we funded them both to do
studies and Kevin hall study if you
believe what Kevin were if you believe
Kevin interpreted it correctly was not
supportive of this model that
carbohydrates are ultimately driving
insulin and insulin is driving up that
accumulation and then the David Ludwig
study reported the opposite and david
has criticized Kevin study and Kevin
has criticized David's study and this is
the nature of science this is what you
do in science he do an experiment people
critique it ideally you do another one
kevin has decided well kevin is doing
another one I think he's asking the
wrong questions but I just saw the other
day that he's doing another experiment
today the the middle study was a free
living diet study we're done by
Christopher Gardner at Stanford
University and the idea was original
idea was 600 people randomized to either
a very low carbohydrate diet or a very
low-fat diet and then we funded it in
part because we hoped that Christopher
would be able to get people to almost a
ketogenic diet on the low-carb side and
Dean Ornish who promotes a low-fat diet
always complained in the low-fat diet
wasn't that enough so hopefully they'd
be able to separate out these two at the
end of the trial they got pretty lousy
adherence low-carb was about 25 to 28
percent carb which is by no means a low
main ingredient at our live pretty
typical in free living studies and the
low-fat was about equal what they did
which it's funny we realize this on one
side but not the other um they told the
low-carb group not to eat sugars and
refined grains which are by my
hypothesis the most fattening
carbohydrates and they also told the low
fat group to not eat refined sugars and
refined grains so they basically removed
the most fattening parts of the diet
from both arms of the study it's funny
we knew that we're going to do with the
low-carb group because you have to and
my colleagues actually knew they were
gonna do with a low fat group I didn't
know that when I found out I was stunned
because now you're testing two diets
neither one of them have sugar or white
bread so now you see similar weight loss
with relatively poor compliance why
would they do that
that doesn't make any sense with the
well their argument and wheat we talked
to Chris for a lot of his argument he
was afraid there are two things on he
wanted to die to be healthy so a healthy
in 2015 has become a diet that doesn't
have sugar and white bread in it so he
wasn't going to promote sugar and white
bread to one diet or another um I take
so long as the period of time with her
studying these people they were on a
there's host B on the diet for you okay
that make sense them yeah so that's the
question is again would you expect to
see a difference I can send you an email
I wrote to my new C colleagues in 2015 I
could read it when I found out about
this low-fat thing saying this is insane
he's removed the they're both groups are
carbohydrate restricted well so you
could think of it as a low fat
carbohydrate restricted diet and a high
fat carbohydrate restricted dye and then
he kind of got the same answer which
could be for any reason whatsoever
there's a paper I don't know if I can
well I'm not gonna talk about it's bad
enough talking about ambiguous studies
that have been published without getting
into unpublished research but so people
see this the New York Times for instance
did two stories on it one of them said
it's not about calories it's about the
quality the sugar and their fine grain
because both groups restricted sugar and
refined grains and lost weight the other
and that was written by a reporter who
tends to believe what we believe and the
other article said it's all about the
calories because both groups ended up on
average eating 500 calories each at the
end up from a scientific perspective
being a poorly done study even though we
funded it I'm not it's just it didn't
answer the question you said 500
calories each five average straight
their calorie and that's actually
self-reported so it's not a so it's not
particularly meaningful so again these
are I don't like using it's complicated
study because it's low in sugar well
it's also free living yeah so both sides
are low in sugar both sides are not
eating processed they were two full
differences in total carbohydrate intake
okay so even though they were both not
eating as much refined carbohydrate
there were still two fold differences or
greater over the period of that study in
total carbohydrate intake if you believe
the whole frequency questionnaires that
you just said we don't know whether we
you could be talking about vegetables
you could be talking about
fruits well these are healthy
carbohydrates that they had primarily in
this study can we now and we agree that
that study can be interpreted from
virtually any way you want it's better I
don't agree with that now now what we
will agree on I'll agree with you on
this is that refined carbohydrates and
sugar are the most fattening type of
carbohydrate that we can agree on oh my
god we came to an agreement no but the
question is why is it because people eat
so here's the thing if you if you
believe Gary's hypothesis now any kind
of carbohydrate increases insulin levels
some do it more than others refined
carbohydrates do it more any kind of
carbohydrate increases insulin levels
relative to fat okay and so if that is
true and these groups and that matters
for fat loss these groups had two full
differences in carbohydrate intake even
though it was predominantly healthy
carbs you would have seen something you
shouldn't have seen the exact same
amount of weight loss in these two
groups right right but they're not high
in sugar resident your argument as
always no that's the other part of the
argument which is take away the sugar
and that was the problem with one of the
problems with the energy yeah the
argument I make in and it's Stefan's
completely right I'm defending my
hypothesis okay I see a study that he
does the same thing he did it here we
all do it you see a study that disagrees
with you you find the reason why didn't
I believe it in every study ever done
has plenty of reasons not to do and not
to believe it that's why independent
replication is something you always
wanted get another group to do the study
ideally a third group people come in
they criticize the study then you do it
again yes and again and again and so you
know what I was trying when we even when
we started the nutrition science
initiative the choice that was a
non-profit the choice of the word
initiative was to get nutrition
researchers to an effect stop using
these garbage poorly designed studies to
come to conclusions because they liked
or disliked the interpretation but try
to get them to think the way harder
scientists would in developing studies
that ask precisely the right question
and then so even the pilot study that
was interpreted
is not supporting this hypothesis and
again you could argue that for an hour
and nobody's gonna care that study was
not randomized so none randomized study
you can't infer causality it's that's
why it was a pilot study one of the many
reasons it was a pilot study the people
who think this carbohydrate model so
when we talk about the carbohydrate
insulin model means carbohydrates are
fattening that's the basis of bread
pasta potato and and sugar maybe the the
thing that's necessary to add to the
diet to make all these carbs fattening
because sugar as we talked about this a
year and a half ago the fructose
molecule is metabolized in the liver
it's linked to fat accumulation the
liver which is linked to insulin like
the way you're squeezing your stomach
fat what we're talking about them I got
a workout dude the board you know for
these experiments be done right there
they have to be tested right if you
can't use Forks poorly designed
experiments it poorly
you know and every experiment ever done
and so what we've tried to do is keep
working towards better experiments
there's now a new version of the Ludwig
experiment being done that the Arnold
Foundation loren john arnold funded to
the tune of i think 13 million dollars
and whatever that study finds Kevin Hall
will probably find the reason look in it
and find a reason to question and
ideally they would be working together
so that you've come up with the
criticisms before you've spent 13
million dollars but this is how science
works my job was to tell a good story as
Stephan would say and I believe people
who read the books can judge whether
it's a good you know am i convincing in
arguing that you add sugar they counter
evidence to everything there wasn't
counter evidence and wouldn't require a
journalist to come along in 20 whatever
it is 19 look to make these all right
let me ask you this because this is
something that you've admitted to
something you said rather why are sugary
carbohydrates the most fattening well if
this hype
offices is correct I think you would say
that they they've trigger our food war
there they are yeah wait wait let me
just finish it I would say the
counter-argument is that they create a
hormonal milieu in the body that that
over responds to insulin and insulin
what we haven't said is if you look in a
textbook for fat metabolism and fatiha
you know what causes fat storage insulin
is the hormone that primarily regulates
fat storage in your fat cells so the
idea is you raise insulin and the sugar
because of this half of it being
fructose and that mostly being
metabolized in the small intestine and
the liver seems may indeed cause insulin
resistance and if it does you over
respondent's and so one is a peripheral
explanation not that people don't love
it and they don't want to you know over
consume it whatever that means and the
other is a central explanation yeah so I
mean sugar is a factor that makes us
want to eat foods right I mean this is
one of the many food properties I would
love to talk about this more that caused
dopamine release in the brain and
dopamine is a chemical that sets our
motivational levels to do certain
behaviors so the reason we become
addicted to drugs is that they go in the
brain and they stimulate dopamine
release and that reinforces drug seeking
behaviors where but this is just causing
you to consume more correct but you're
saying that the actual amount let's if
you have the same amount of
carbohydrates that are sugary
carbohydrates yes is the same amount
that our vegetable carbohydrates the
sugary carbohydrates are going to be
more fattening no no I didn't say it was
independently of calories it's entirely
dependent on calories yeah correct and
we have randomized controlled trials
demonstrating this so if you look at the
randomized there by the way we're not
we're not operating in an evidence
vacuum there's tons of randomized
control trials let's do this yeah random
these randomized controlled csr they
short-term it depends well it depends on
how you define short-term they're not
last long years and years and years
isn't the issue though long term chronic
effects like that seems to be possibly
but let me put it this way you know
if you believe that insulin is the cause
the effect of insulin on fat cells
happens almost immediately
so insulin I'm not aware of any
mechanism of insulin on fat cells that
takes more than a few hours to occur and
so if you believe that insulin causes
obesity this should be happening
immediately you shouldn't have to wait
months and months for this to occur oh
no that doesn't make any sense at all no
it does make sense to you well cuz again
he's he's kind of making this up as he
goes along so the idea is well explain
why it doesn't make sense without
consulting him that's possible has he
not been insulting me ever my just
biased I realized that I it's everything
but necessarily saying he's insulting
your stories not you personally but what
what what do you what why doesn't it
make sense to you okay so the idea is
when your insulin was elevated you're
storing fat right ah it depends on what
you mean by that that's not see you do a
little bit of bait-and-switch here no no
no that's an until just answer the
question if it's a clarify well it
depends what do you mean by store I mean
your fat cells are accumulating fat when
insulin is el-amin's do you mean
accumulate like like what next a fat
like it inhibits yeah that's incorrect
it stimulates lipoprotein lipase and
inhibits hormone sense we should size
this because that's in there it's in the
textbook no yeah we'll talk about what's
in the textbook don't worry Gary they
Jesus okay so you don't believe in one
but just give me your position and I'll
let him refute it it's here but just say
it just I will just show it okay cuz
again you're gonna say it's not in here
so I have the same textbook and then
we'll let Joe here suppression of fat
mobilization by insulin and there's
another graph that is a stimulation of
fat mobilization congratulations to all
of you people that are listening to this
there are nowhere in the weird
scientific let me just say this is gonna
take a long time so we agree on the
molecular mechanisms okay we agree on
the molecular mechanisms the impact of
insulin on enzymes and fat cells what we
disagree about is the implications of
that and yeah and I think that's what we
should talk about that's true because
nowhere in that textbook does it say
that insulin regulates the total size of
body fat so absolutely that is someone
talking mo have added on absolute that
mechanism would you like to know
conversation I have with the author no
and not right now actually so the now
the let me tell you about the card we
talk for three hours
can you stop interrupting me please okay
now let me explain
so insulin essentially does have effects
on enzymes that cause fat cells to take
up more fat and to release less fat so
that's the part that you're right about
that's what that textbook talks about
right now that does not mean that does
not imply that insulin causes fat
storage as in the accumulation of fat
from day to day and let me explain why
that is so insulin is basically a
traffic cop that allows your body to
burn the fuel that you just consumed so
when you eat a diet that's high in
carbohydrate and low in fat your insulin
goes up your body restricts the fat from
going out of fat cells it turns that
down not off but down it causes less fat
to come out of your fat cells and then
your body's burning carbs that's what
you just ate right now if you eat a diet
that's high in fat and lower in
carbohydrate you secrete less insulin
those effects don't occur on your fat
cells and that allows your body to burn
the fat that you just ate but at the end
of the day the amount of fat that you
have in your body is the amount that you
ate minus the amount that you burned
that's what determines the amount this
is just arithmetic right amount that you
ate minus the amount that you burned and
if you eat a low fat diet you're not
eating much and you're not burning much
you're in the same place
as if you're eating a diet where you're
eating a lot of fat and burning a lot of
fat and the way we know that's true is
because varying the amount of
carbohydrate and fat in the diet makes
no difference to body fatness in
randomized controlled trials okay so I
know that what I just said is correct No
so the first of all it's one randomized
control trial it's Kevin hall again no
meta-analysis we twenty randomized
controlled about the meta-analysis we
decided that I think you know that
what's wrong with men and now a crappy
study ever done he doesn't like who did
it basin no no no I don't care who does
it I don't like men analyses I don't
like the concept of them I think it's
one of the problems with modern
nutritional and medical sciences you do
crappy studies generate garbage and then
you sift through the garbage and say I
can find a truth in here and the answer
is do better studies answers always do
better studies you can't do your meta
analyses they exist for everything the
issue is just is as simple and remember
we're talking about the ten calories a
day so when you said the difference
between the fat burned and the fat store
the fat consumed and the fat expended
has to be ten calories a day that's
that's what we're talking about ten
calories in the fat tissue okay so if it
is true that if I consume 1,500 calories
a day and I somehow metabolize or
excrete 1490 and I guarantee that no
such study was ever so carefully done
you say that this is the energy balance
Consortium study the Kevin hall study
that we've talked about one of the
things there are two things that have
when you put people on a ketogenic diet
among other things you generate ketones
and you lose ketones in the breath and
in the urine and one of the things you
have to do in these energy balance
experiments is measure calories loss
through fecal material who knows maybe
you jack up the fat consumption maybe
they lose more fat calories when they
shit it out or maybe the five valerie's
matter I think when you're measuring the
fat balance what you're talking about
you have to measure the amount of fat in
and out and so I'm giving you an example
and response here
question was because you give me an
example in that study they didn't do
either of those measurements they
modelled one and the other one they
couldn't get the the assay to work after
a year or two years and gave up on it
and so you just don't know but getting
back to this question we're talking
about somebody's throwing ten calories
of fat in their fat cells let's never
get away from that or 20 calories and so
the question is always is this mechanism
capable of explaining the 20 calories or
is the what in my name looking in that
book well it's essentially what he was
saying and in some inhibits fat
mobilization from well I could read it
if you wanted to read it you know I mean
I mean Gary and I both agree with what's
in that textbook you can read it if you
want it restrains fat mobilization
through two mechanisms suppression of
light lipolysis right yeah lipolysis
mechanisms are described in the text and
the stimulation of the re estera
fication of fatty acids within the a
data pile I stepped aside at depe sites
at diploid FSL fat cells note that the
same process of esterification will also
be simultaneously incorporated fatty
acids from circulating try glycerol
triglycerides yeah triacylglycerol try
asshole Chris try acyl grosser all right
released by lipoprotein lipos plan pays
Lin pay that's enough Joe we get lipase
yeah l IPAs e into stored try acyl
glycerol yeah so let me just explain
this briefly the argument I've been
making and others is that insulin
inhibits fat loss like if you're a fat
cell and you see insulin you hold on to
your fat right kind of that simple
Stephan's absolutely right this book
which is we're talking about is it
metabolic regulation human perspective
it's written by Keith frame who's
retired Oxford professor is a wonderful
man and he was the world's leading
authority on
Baalak regulation how your body controls
its use of fuel and orchestrate storage
and oxidation and in this book
Keith frein talks about how insulin
determines fat accumulation and fat
cells and not accumulation that whatever
fat storage fat storage fat trying to
make fatty acid trafficking in and out
of fat cells okay thank you so the first
time I ever interviewed Keith was for a
piece I was doing for the journal
science on insulin resistance and we
spent about an hour in the phone and he
explained to me for 20 minutes all the
ways insulin traps determines fatty acid
trafficking across the fat cell membrane
and you raise insulin you accumulate
more fat on the short term and then we
got to obesity and they said whoa B
cities you know caused by odd people
eating too much and I said Keith when we
were talking about why fat cells get fat
it was all insulin mediated and when we
were talking about people get fat it was
this eating too much thing okay and you
switched mechanisms on me so my
assumption is the same reason people get
fat as the same reason their fat cells
get fat and you've got a whole lot of
you've got this disorder metabolic
syndrome we're talking about which
includes not just problems with your
blood lipids but it includes getting fat
at your waistline increasing and it's an
insulin resistance related disorder
which means your insulin is elevated and
again this is where we end up with two
hypotheses about why insulin is elevated
but if the friends and sugar can elevate
insulin you end up with metabolic
syndrome you're in fat storage mode
that's the terminology of diet book
doctors so now you're storing fat and
you only have to do 10 calories a day 20
calories a day you're gonna get obese
and it's insulin median insulins
responding to the carbohydrate content
of the diet primarily and that's it and
when I said this to Keith you know
you've got one mechanism for why fat
cells get fat in a different mechanism
for why humans get fat and I'd like to
talk
about this overeating concept he said
you know I never thought of that I mean
the guy had been in the field 40 years
and Neela maybe 50 and then I had a long
conversation with him I was back in
Oxford when I did that
insane Allen arrogant debate I stopped
off at Oxford on the way to Manchester
and we had a long conversation with
Keith and I said look what I want you to
do is just come up with a hypothesis of
obesity from the fat cells perspective
right shed your brain centric energy
balanced centric thing and ask yourself
what does the fat cells see and if
nothing else asks a student to do it as
an experiment I mean that would be a
great thought experiment for kid what's
gonna make a fat cell fat and then our
assumption is gonna be that's what's
gonna make a human fat and Keith said I
hate it literally said to me he was
retiring and he was going off to garden
um I kind of envy them
but he said no I just can't i can't put
energy balance aside you're telling me
to not think in terms of intake and
expenditure and i can't do it and i mean
wonderful man he literally and this is
again when i've been arguing is all
these people are so including Stefan who
was you know learned in this world
they're so locked into this thinking
that obesity is this energy imbalance
and they can't get away from it so
everything they do everything they
interpret and when Stefan says there's
study after study and there's 20
randomized control studies and it's so
I'm gonna shovel the evidence on top of
you and I'm saying look I guarantee if
we go through those 20 studies they'll
be just like the Jim Hill study they
assumed energy balance was the cause and
then they wanted to see what caused
energy imbalance and they started with
the wrong hypothesis they're trapped in
a paradigm we've all seen this can I
respond to this he's okay so Gary I
pre-ordered your book I have a copy of
your book right here good calories bad
calories i pre-ordered this in 2008
because I was so excited to read this
book yes and what he mailed me I tore
through it and I was so persuaded when I
initially read this ten years ago that I
ate a low carbohydrate diet for six
months because I thought I was I thought
the carbs were gonna make me fat and
give me
diabetes so I was fully immersed and
convinced by your perspective when I
yeah and you and you sign this book you
see I have your signature we had a very
nice dinner together and the thing that
caused me to go away from that
perspective was when I actually started
investigating the evidence on my own
underlying these ideas I started doing
my own research I didn't take your word
for it I started doing my own research
in the lab as well and actually doing
real scientific studies but what to our
study found that it did not line up with
what you were saying in your book and
what I ended up realizing about good
calories bad calories is essentially
your arguments primarily rely on
historical narratives and speculation
and there's very little of actually
saying what is the most pertinent
scientific evidence to answer this
question and what does that evidence
have to say it's mostly historical
narratives and honestly you know I'm
gonna try to say this in a non insulting
way but I will simply say that others
who have looked at the same historical
evidence have come to different
conclusions than you have and that
includes me in the places where I've
looked at the historical evidence and so
I think that you know this idea that I
am like locked in some paradigm and
can't see what you're talking about I
was there Gary I am post so let me okay
so let me let me let me just say B's in
track because here we're gonna wrap this
up soon so we've really got near three
hours almost um remember when you drove
up here from San Diego this morning and
I was listening to Stefan on a different
podcast and you were talking about how
you are eating behavior differed on low
carb diets versus the higher carb diet
you eat now and you talked about your
resistance it was easier to fast on the
low carb diet correct okay and you
didn't really have an explanation for it
I don't have a very well anyway go ahead
yeah so again the argument I've been
making is this there's two ways to look
at everything
so one way is the low-carb diet somehow
because of I don't food reward issues
affects your urge to eat Kart and low
carb foods and because of that you don't
hunger for them as much and when you're
on a higher carb diet I think the way
you phrase done and so the podcast was
your body sort of tells you it's Meal
Time so it's conditioned to me even
better so the alternative hypothesis
here the other way to think about is on
the low-carb diet it's insulin levels
are staying lower when they're saying
lower he's mobilizing fat and he's
oxidizing that fat and as you said on
the podcast and even a you know the 135
pound marathoner has enough fat in his
body to run for a week so the reason
you're able to skip meals is because
insulin is low fuel my wife is calling
she's probably telling me I'm getting
shrill there's a different way to look
at everything that's the point I'm
trying to with every study I mean can
you tell me evidence that can you give
me actual evidence that the lower level
of insulin is the cause of not needing
to eat those meals no okay I'm giving
you a hypotenuse angle like we're
talking about fasting right if you're
fasting for a certain prolonged period
of time your body's going to go into a
ketogenic state we all agree Yeah right
and that's that's the reason why it's
easier to fast once you're in ketogenic
states your body starts burning off fat
and this is a widely reported nots
living on fat it's metabolically flexp
donut because so yeah it's the idea that
it's living on your fat is evidence that
you're getting thinner on that low-carb
diet is its fat balance it's the amount
you're eating minus the amount you're
burn no but it's a question as it's Asif
the amount you're trapping and that's
what you keep leaving out so if you have
no that has been tested don't know if
you did is what I'm saying it has not
been tested that's what I'm saying
that's why we found that new see that's
why we spend thirty million dollars
that's why David Ludwick is doing
another 13 million dollars study it has
not been tested when you when you feed
people whether it's over feeding or
under feeding and you're causing weight
loss or weight maintenance
the carb to fat ratio of the diet makes
almost notify me give you another
remaining Studies on it the famous
feeding study from the 60s which I
thought when you said Horton I thought
you meant Edie Horton not TJ Horton so
ed Horton and Ethan Sims that did a
prisoner study they literally they they
wanted to get the over feed again
they're using their thinking in terms of
eating too much they wanted to get first
get college kids to gain 25% of excess
body weight this was in the 60s and they
couldn't get the college kids to do it
which suggests that college kids were
different in the 60s than they are today
so they used prisoners in the Vermont
state prison and they overfed them and
you discuss this in your book they could
get these prisoners to eat 10,000
calories a day of excess carbohydrates
and excess calories
it was calories not carbohydrate might
have been calories they couldn't get him
to add more than a thousand calories of
fat okay and they talked about this sim
studies were crazy because I published
in 15 different journals so they
interpreted this study if you looked at
pounds gained per calorie added they
gained more per calorie of fat than they
did per calorie of carbs but if you
looked at how much they could eat they
couldn't add that much fat and they
could add like eight thousand seven
thousand extra calories of carbon is
actually a line on one of the papers
when they say they would eat 10,000
calories and then go to bed hungry
craving more carbs so then the question
becomes again is it because the carbs
are doing something in the brain to
increase food reward or is that the
carbs are doing something in the body so
that their body is figured out a way it
can orchestrate
deal with this massive influx of carbs
versus fat but there's always two ways
to look at it and every time Stefan says
there's masses of evidence my job as a
journalist was to go through and say
does this refute that hypothesis and if
it doesn't we have to hold on to it cuz
remember we have an obesity and diabetes
epidemic and the kind of advice where we
tell people to sleep better and eat less
or avoid foods that they love don't em
Pete
and ice cream and it's implies that the
reason they get fat
even though overeating a hypothesis and
ice cream what do you think no I think
we would both say don't eat peas don't
ask questions like that thank you
um the is something wrong out there
tragically wrong we know if nothing else
I think you would agree with this so the
whole low-carb movement as you said it
on this podcast was that you know what
I've done if nothing else is I've
convinced people they could eat low carb
diets without killing themselves that's
a good thing yeah and I'm implying that
with the I assume with the sugar book
even if I'm wrong that getting people to
eat less sugar is a good thing mm-hmm so
ultimately these are good things that
I've done my own tirely Gary not
entirely because you're telling people
that only carbohydrate matters
I'm not tell me how hard you have argued
at length in calorie intake and dietary
fat intake and physical activity do not
influence body fatness and are not with
your ex marry the wrong way I'm doing
that no if you're going to look look at
the model that we published that you
contributed to and we signed off it
doesn't say anything about it says that
physical activity dietary fat intake and
calorie intake are not important I
refuse to ability and somebody who's on
a Scott that way because they were
sedentary okay okay you're right pardis
requires but what I'm saying is that
there is harm in what you're saying
because yes we all agree that these
carbohydrates are fattening but you're
saying that these other important things
are irrelevant and that's the difference
more than what you're saying no no no
what I'm saying about calories is it's
the wrong way to think about so wait you
think they do matter I'm saying calories
of the run don't put words and okay
calories matters hours are a way to
measure the quantity of food you're
eating it could use grams you could use
anything else okay the question is is it
the right way to think about it can you
solve an obesity problem let me give you
an example before we go let me just read
you though excess calorie intake and
physical inactivity in Andheri to this
process and not themselves determinants
of
body yeah no I think that is what you
said is fine in our can I read you
something debate no it's okay that's I'm
not putting words I just want to read
yeah but that's different than what you
just try okay sure it is they're just
okay let me read you something they just
never seemed to be enough food to say if
she ate Carl's growing body after school
he would eat a footlong sub before his
mother's home cook dinners even after
having a hefty lunch of homemade chicken
rice and vegetables and his favorite
snacks granola bars and buncher crunch
okay a lot of calories okay one person
we are talking about one week yeah how
is this gonna I just want to know okay
so one anecdotal one of my problems with
the whole overeating hypothesis is it's
tautological you don't know if someone's
overeating unless they're fat right
incorrect well this fellow I just
regular intake and you can know we would
eat a footlong sub before his mother
some group dinners even after having
after lunch of homemade chicken rice and
vegetable yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah again
that's one story - my point is it's like
you cannot tell if someone's fat I you
have no idea how many calories I consume
right I could probably get a pretty
decent estimate actually based on
published formulas okay so and then how
would you know whether I was overeating
remember we're talking about ten
calories a day
no it's stored in the fat tissue well
that depends on whether you mean how you
define that but I I could look at your
body composition and I could tell you
whether you were overeating relative to
a lean person yes because i have excess
body fat correct yes so without knowing
if i have excess body fat
you cannot tell whether i'm overeating
which is the cause of the excess body
fat right let's strike you a circular
there's nothing circular about it look
if you take somebody and you increase
their calorie intake carbs are fat
either way they gain body fat there's
nothing circular I'm not saying that
calories in
confident that the fellow and if you
take someone who is currently has
obesity and you reduce their calorie
intake carbs or fat doesn't make any
difference they lose body fat that so
there's nothing circular about this
calorie but you know it does make no no
I just the I I don't understand how you
could possibly think that was circular
it's so simple on that right but let me
go through it one more time listen
you're not going through anything one
more time we're getting anything done
here there was a lot of fun it was that
much fun it was it's interesting I mean
there's that I I don't know who to
believe quite honestly I think you both
make some excellent points and I think
there's definitely some real legitimate
concern that you have about his position
and I think that your position has some
merit as well the position about insulin
and about carbohydrates and sugar this
is a really long conversation and I
think we could probably do this for
another six days
forget about hours I think if I would
recommend people I think people have to
really kind of figure this out for
themselves I would recommend Stefan
please recommend your book what is your
book again
yeah book is called the hungry very
hungry brain and it's available
everywhere Amazon all that yes and uh
Gary yeah it's good calories bad
calories or why we get fat or the case
against sugar I think we've just begun
this debate I know it's been going on
yeah we've got a lot of evidence here
that I didn't have time to cite
unfortunate yeah well it was a long one
but thank you gentlemen
thank you all right thank you Joe
[Music]
[Applause]